
Annual lecture article

Urban Studies
2015, Vol. 52(14) 2515–2550
� Urban Studies Journal Limited 2015
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0042098015601362
usj.sagepub.com

Gentrification on the planetary urban
frontier: The evolution of Turner’s
noösphere

Elvin Wyly
University of British Columbia, Canada

Abstract
As capitalist urbanisation evolves, so too does gentrification. Theories and experiences that have
anchored the reference points of gentrification in the Global North for half a century are now
rapidly evolving into more cosmopolitan, dynamic world urban systems of variegated gentrifica-
tions. These trends seem to promise a long-overdue postcolonial provincialisation of the
entrenched Global North bias of urban theory. Yet there is a jarring paradox between the mate-
rial realities of some of the largest non-military urban displacements in human history in the
Global South, alongside a growing reluctance to ‘impose’ Northern languages, theories and poli-
tics of gentrification to understand these processes. In this paper, I negotiate this paradox through
an engagement of several seemingly unrelated empirical trends and theoretical debates in urban
studies and gentrification. My central argument is that interdependent yet partially autonomous
developments in urban entrepreneurialism and transnational markets in labour, real estate and
education are transcending the dichotomy between gentrification in cities (the traditional focus of
so much place-based research) versus gentrification as a dimension of planetary urbanisation. Amidst
the planetary technological transformations now celebrated as ‘cognitive capitalism’ and a
communications-consciousness ‘noösphere’, these developments are coalescing into a global, cos-
mopolitan and multicultural tapestry of explicitly evolutionary class transformations of urban
space that adapt to multiply scaled contingencies of urban history, socio-cultural difference, state
power and terrains of resistance. The argument proceeds in three steps. First, I explain how
social Darwinism was deeply embedded within conventional urban theory in the decades before
Ruth Glass gave us a language for the discussion of gentrification, thus perpetuating debates over
narrow empirical issues at the expense of deeper critical scrutiny of the evolutionary logics of
socio-spatial classifications. Second, I examine the recent movement for a ‘cosmopolitan decolo-
nisation’ of gentrification theory that has emerged at the precise moment when powerful alliances
are consolidating the networked infrastructures of gentrification on an unprecedented scale.
Third, I analyse the contemporary evolution of gentrification as a recombinant blend of old and
new, as the means of class transformation of urban space are accelerated through intensified

Corresponding author:

Elvin Wyly, University of British Columbia, Geography,

1984 West Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z2,

Canada, UK.

Email: ewyly@geog.ubc.ca

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1177%2F0042098015601362&domain=pdf&date_stamp=2015-10-06


competition in work, education and housing. The built environments of planetary urbanisation
provide ample opportunities not only for diverse cosmopolitan descendants of old-fashioned
urban renewal in the style of Haussmann’s Paris or Moses’ New York, but also for new genera-
tions of ‘capitalists with conscience’–entrepreneurial coalitions closing ‘moral rent gaps’ by inte-
grating the economic profits of gentrification with the discourses and practices of environmental
sustainability, socially responsible development and global fields of educational opportunity. All of
these escalating competitions are legitimated as inclusive multicultural meritocracies. Yet the
relentless optimism of competitive innovation in the cognitive-capitalist noösphere is creating
dangerous new frontiers of human ecology that reproduce the social-Darwinist ‘form of society’
that Frederick Jackson Turner envisioned in his theorisation of the ‘recurrence of the process of
evolution’ in America’s colonial-settler waves of violent dispossession.

Keywords
Chicago School, gentrification, noösphere, social Darwinism

Received April 2015; accepted July 2015

Sexton’s new frontier

‘With the sum total of human knowledge,
past and present, at our fingertips’, we are
told on the website Big Think (2014), ‘we’re
faced with a crisis of attention: which ideas
should we engage with, and why?’. Big
Think promises to help us sift through this
vast informational rainforest, offering ‘an
evolving roadmap to the best thinking on
the planet’, so we can appreciate and use the
important concepts that can be ‘lenses for
envisioning the future’. John Sexton, the
charismatic and polarising ‘imperial
President’ (Aviv, 2013) of New York
University, has seen that future, and in a Big
Think video (Sexton, 2008) he offers an
appropriately audacious thought on what it
all means. ‘Biodiversity is good’, he empha-
sises, challenging the obsolete American
melting-pot ideology that tried to turn
America ‘into some great Velveeta cheese of
humanity’. No, Sexton warns, this kind of
assimilationist logic is wrong and dangerous.
Now, ‘post-environmental movement’, we
now know that biodiversity is good, and
‘Human diversity is good. Intellectual diver-
sity is good. This is a wonderful gift from

God. We don’t want to homogenize. We
want to create communities of microcom-
munities. New York is the first experiment
in what the whole world is going to be.’
Sexton’s vision for NYU is an institution in
and of the city, ‘ecosystemic in the city’, that
will demonstrate through its community of
microcommunities how ‘humanity begins to
operate like a great watch of interconnecting
parts, not isolated from each other, but a
whole that’s greater than the sum of the
parts’.

For those who remember the history of
urban theory, Sexton’s ‘ecosystemic’ meta-
phors immediately remind us of the domi-
nant Chicago School human ecology
tradition of the 20th century, where the city
‘is a product of nature, and particularly of
human nature,’ (Park, 1925: 1), with biologi-
cal metaphors for neighbourhood change as
‘invasion and succession’, as each social
group develops in its own distinctive ‘natural
area’ of the city. The bio-logical genealogy
of the Chicago School is certainly important
for any understanding of the significance of
Sexton’s project, but his direct inspiration
comes from a more surprising, obscure
source:

2516 Urban Studies 52(14)



I have a doctorate in religion, trained by the
Jesuits, so I tend to think in Teilhardian terms
about a kind of noösphere, where there’s a
whole different way of existence for human-
kind .

Pierre Teilhard de Chardin (1881–1955) was
an evolutionary vertebrate palaeontologist
who was also an ordained Jesuit priest: his
life’s work became a philosophical synthesis of
the science of human evolution with the faith
of Catholic theology. He was a prolific writer,
but some of his most important works only
appeared posthumously, thanks to the
Church’s prohibition on his challenges to offi-
cial doctrine. The concept that captures
Sexton’s imagination comes from the Greek
noos (mind) + sphaera (sphere), which
Teilhard de Chardin developed through con-
versations in Paris in the 1920s with the
French philosopher Edouard le Roy and the
Russian geochemist-cosmologist Vladimir
Vernadsky (Turner, 2005). Surveying the
spreading environmental consequences of
urbanisation and industrialisation, Vernadsky
foresaw a collective human understanding of
the need to live as part of, rather than against,
nature in all of Earth’s ‘terrestrial zone con-
taining life’ (Teilhard de Chardin, 1947, rep-
rinted in Teilhard de Chardin, 1964: 151).
Teilhard de Chardin refined the noösphere
into the idea of a planetary ‘superstage of con-
sciousness’, a ‘process of co-cerebration’ and
‘co-reflexive evolution’ in an irresistible inflex-
ion from complex divergence towards a move
that is ‘compressional and converging’, driven
‘by the double curvature of our rounded
mother-planet and of our converging minds’
(Teilhard de Chardin, 1956: 109, 112, 111).
Put simply, the expansion of travel, communi-
cation and human interaction to the planetary
scale would allow – through ‘our converging
minds’ – an entirely new phase of the collec-
tive evolution of humanity. Humanity would
‘move toward unheard-of and unimaginable
degrees of organized complexity and of

reflective consciousness’, to become ‘ultra-
reflexive (that is, ‘‘ultra-human’’)’ along the
way to an ‘implosive concentration’ of the
‘cultural noösphere’ of Earth and every other
‘thinking planet’ in what de Chardin acknowl-
edged was a ‘wild hypothesis of a transhuman
universe’ (de Chardin, 1956: 111). Teilhard de
Chardin’s noösphere combined the state of
the art in biology and palaeontology to fuse
‘the rise of self-evolution’ of an ‘unbroken
sheet of organized consciousness’ (Teilhard de
Chardin, 1956: 109) with Christian theology in
a universalising cosmological ontology of
humanity, nature, science, communication,
culture and God. The ‘Last Page of the
Journal of Pierre Teilhard de Chardin’, written
on Maundy Thursday in 1955 three days
before his death, presents a concise diagram of
‘What I believe’, and connects ‘Christogenesis’
to an evolutionary cosmology:

Cosmos = Cosmogenesis – Biogenesis –
Noogenesis –

The universe is centered – Evolutively .
(Teilhard de Chardin, 1955, in Teilhard de
Chardin, 1964: 311)

This equation appears under the notes ‘St.
Paul – the three verses: En pase panta
Theos’. This is Greek for ‘God All in All’,
the culmination of 1 Corinthians (26–28),
written by the Apostle Paul in 55 cE in an
attempt to unify a fractious church begun
only three years earlier in Corinth, Greece’s
thriving, cosmopolitan world city of the day
– with its synagogue and its raucous temples
to Apollo and Aphrodite. Teilhard de
Chardin died in the Corinth of the American
Century, New York City, at the height of an
imperial modernity shaped by a collective
imagined community built on histories of a
West descended from the Greek polis.
Images and narratives of these collective
memories of the present were suddenly
flooding the expanding planetary circuits of
the electronic age – and Teilhard died in

Wyly 2517



‘almost famous’ obscurity, even as technolo-
gical communications breakthroughs were
vindicating his claim that ‘the axis of
twentieth-century social evolution lay in the
psychic (interpersonal) and political realm’
(Buttimer, 1971: 85). In an oral history in
the 1990s, Tom Wolfe recalls that Marshall
McLuhan was ‘deeply influenced’ by
Teilhard de Chardin, but McLuhan ‘never’
acknowledged the connection to avoid
offending the Catholic hierarchy at his pro-
fessional home, St. Michael’s College at the
University of Toronto (see Cavell, 2002:
256). But now, in the 21st century, the
Teilhardian medium is the message, in a
‘superstage of consciousness’ achieved
through planetary communication circuits of
entertainment, advertising, marketing,
investment and education in a multipolar
world of diverse, dynamic global cities. The
noösphere has been the buzzword, the next
new thing in Silicon Valley for more than a
decade (Lanier, 2010, 2013), and there is
now a thriving literature analysing how glo-
balisation and technological change have
given rise to a new kind of ‘cognitive-cul-
tural capitalism’ (Moulier-Boutang, 2012;
Scott, 2007, 2011a, 2011b, 2014) – a
‘‘‘knowledge-based’’ capitalism’ with ‘biome-
dical and genetic engineering and artificial
intelligence at the forefront’ (Harvey, 2014:
xii). Sexton’s (2008) contribution to these
discussions involves ‘glocalizing’ NYU’s eco-
systemic heritage: ‘we take being in that
local city and we extrapolate it out to the
world’. Sexton’s noösphere is what he calls
the Global Network University: students are
admitted to NYU through one of three gate-
ways – NYU New York, NYU Shanghai, or
NYU Abu Dhabi – and then spend parts of
their degree programme circulating amongst
a world urban system of ‘idea capitals’
including Accra, Berlin, Buenos Aires,
Florence, London, Madrid, Paris, Prague,
Sydney, Tel Aviv and Washington, DC.
Sexton is explicit in moving beyond the

‘Eurocentric bias’ of existing Ivy League
Study Abroad programmes, and the goal is
‘at least 16 sites’ in world idea capitals, ‘with
at least one on each of the six inhabited con-
tinents’ (Sexton, 2010).

Sexton’s purpose is to mobilise educa-
tional institutions in the world’s ‘glocal cit-
ies’ to demonstrate the power and
possibilities of collective human understand-
ing through diversity – as an emancipatory
alternative to the ‘fortress mentality’ of gat-
ing strategies that are destined for global
catastrophe in rising fears and tensions, ‘cul-
minating in a ‘‘clash of civilizations’’’
(Sexton, 2010). The noösphere, in other
words, offers ‘a tremendous opportunity in
the process of global evolution’ (Sexton,
2010). A university ‘in and of the city’,
Sexton shows us, can teach us how to nur-
ture what Kwame Anthony Appiah (1997)
calls ‘cosmopolitan patriots’–‘men and
women whose interests, vision, and alle-
giance are not bounded by place or sover-
eignty and who are ‘‘citizens of the world’’
as well as of their particular cultures’
(Sexton, 2010). While the phrase carries a
whiff of elitism, ‘cosmopolitan patriots’
embody an elitism of meritocratic achieve-
ment that moves beyond the narrow nation-
alist patriotism of the 19th and 20th
centuries – with a fresh transnational out-
look that signals the possibility of a benign,
empathetic and responsible collective force
for progressive change. The world’s best stu-
dents will come to learn with – and trans-
form – NYU’s world-class faculty in
‘kaleidoscopic interaction with deep connec-
tivity’, as humanity learns how to produce
future generations of ‘citizens of global soci-
ety’. This is among the world’s most selec-
tive classes: of the more than 9000 who
applied for the inaugural class, NYU Abu
Dhabi admitted only 188, representing 39
countries and 43 different languages.1

Sexton draws inspiration from cosmopo-
litan patriots as today’s planetary pioneers.2

2518 Urban Studies 52(14)



They have the competitive drive and individ-
ual ambition signified by Richard Florida’s
(2003, 2006) ‘creative class’, but their diverse
and hybrid educational trajectories give
them a transnationally refined version of the
political progressivism associated with the
‘new middle class’ remaking of city life (Ley,
1996), and they also understand what it
means to think and act within collective
assemblages of the human and non-human –
creative human beings circulating in a sys-
tem that he describes as ‘connected skeletally
by highly sophisticated’ ‘social networking
technology’. To see where the cosmopolitan
patriots are going, Sexton borrows from a
borrowed metaphor of Prime Minister
Gordon Brown:

To adapt an aphorism coined by President
Kennedy, the new frontier is that there is no
frontier: no frontier for the internet, for the
mobile phone, for e-mails, for the cyber-world;
no frontier for the capacity of individuals to
influence, inform, or even infuriate each other.
(quoted in Sexton, 2010)

Frontier. Consider three dictionary defini-
tions: ‘the border separating one country
from another’, ‘an area of mental activity
where much remains to be done’ and ‘a mar-
ginal region between settled and unsettled
lands’ (Cayne, 1990: 382). This is where John
Sexton’s Big Think, Gordon Brown’s New
Frontier, and Pierre Teilhard de Chardin’s
noösphere help us understand the frontiers
of gentrification today – more than half a
century after Ruth Glass (1964) first gave us
a word to describe this process of urban
transformation. In The New Urban Frontier,
Neil Smith (1996) analysed how the genoci-
dal disposessions of Frederick Jackson
Turner’s understanding of the frontier in
18th- and 19th-century America – ‘the meet-
ing point between savagery and civilization’
(Turner, 1893: 200) – became the powerful
discourses and material realities of develo-
pers ‘circling the wagons’ to retake Harlem

and all the other territories lost in America’s
20th-century urban crisis. In ‘Gentrification
as global urban strategy’, Smith (2002) diag-
nosed how these frontier processes were
being consolidated through transnational
urban systems of entrepreneurial capitalist-
state coalitions mobilising city spaces as
vehicles for speculative real-estate accumula-
tion. And in one of his last written works,
‘The evolution of gentrification’, Smith
(2011) diagnosed the accelerating pace of
dispossession as cosmopolitan capital oper-
ated through transnational network architec-
tures of revanchist uneven development on a
planetary scale.

Yet there is a tantalising absence in
Smith’s use of the word evolution. While he
diagnoses ‘an extraordinary new departure’
in the scale of today’s ‘economic excommu-
nication of working-class people from their
communities’, Smith is uncharacteristically
cautious and modest in this essay, and never
pushes the meaning of ‘evolution’ beyond
the familiar, neutral sense of change or
transformation. We can learn a great deal if
we take Smith’s title literally, to be bold and
explicit on the evolutionary dynamics of
gentrification. Part of my inspiration here
comes from Eric Clark (1987), who under-
took a meticulous examination of centuries
of land records in order to build an empiri-
cal foundation for Smith’s (1979) theory of
the rent gap in the dynamics of urban trans-
formation; more recently, analysing the
unprecedented challenge of ‘collective self-
regulation’ of planetary humanity that will
be required if we are to achieve sustainabil-
ity, Clark has documented the distortions of
evolutionary science that have privileged
‘gene-centered thought’ and an ‘excessive
individualism’ that obscures Darwin’s per-
spective on species participating collectively
in their own development (Clark and Clark,
2012: 563). In this paper, my goal is to
extend this line of inquiry, focusing more
explicitly on the matter of evolution in

Wyly 2519



frontier metaphors in urban theory, and in
the driving ambitions of cosmopolitan patri-
ots and their visionary mentors such as John
Sexton. My central claim is that we are liv-
ing through a planetary software update of
19th-century, Turneresque social Darwinism
– creating a bizarre transnational urbanisa-
tion of Chicago School positivist logics
masked by the deceptive drop-down-menu
multiculturalism of Silicon Valley’s auto-
mated postpositivist standpoint epistemolo-
gies. The noösphere is the new frontier of
gentrification as the new urban colonialism
(Atkinson and Bridge, 2005) of today’s pla-
netary cognitive capitalism. We are chal-
lenged to reconsider the explicit and implicit
political ethics of the ‘recurrence of the pro-
cess of evolution’ in the ‘process of expan-
sion’ of this new frontier (Turner, 1893:
200).

Let me tell this story in three parts. First,
we’ll consider the role of evolution in the his-
torical context of conventional urban theory
before Ruth Glass gave us a discourse for
the analysis of gentrification. The key point
here is that fundamental axioms of a
hijacked social Darwinism accomplished a
stealth corruption of mainstream urban the-
ory, necessitating the aggressive political
edge that came to define the very best of gen-
trification scholarship; unfortunately, gentri-
fication theory was shaped by reactions to
specific and partial aspects of the Chicago
School’s legacy – perpetuating debates over
narrow empirical issues, and distracting
attention from the evolutionary frontier
ontology that is much more relevant for an
understanding of the cognitive-capitalist
noösphere under conditions of planetary
urbanisation. Second, we’ll consider a recent
political paradox that has emerged with the
arrival of planetary urbanisation: influential,
well-intentioned calls for cosmopolitan per-
spectives from beyond the ‘core’ of the
Global North are being voiced at the precise
moment when powerful coalitions are

consolidating the networked infrastructures
of gentrification on an unprecedented plane-
tary scale. Third, I will evaluate the way this
latest era of gentrification is a recombinant
blend of old and new, with intensified class
competition in education, labour and hous-
ing markets legitimated on the basis of harsh
19th-century evolutionary frontier philoso-
phies masquerading as inclusive multicul-
tural meritocracies. Special scrutiny is here
reserved for the bizarre technological theolo-
gies enacted in and through Silicon Valley – a
location that only begins in the San
Francisco Bay Area. The ‘non-place urban
realm’ of ‘community without propinquity’
diagnosed by the Berkeley urban theorist
Melvin Webber (1964) has been thoroughly
transnationalised, as the ‘massive communi-
cation systems’ (p. 86) of urbanism are now
enmeshed in planetary networks of finance,
information and production sweatshops – all
interconnected through billions of smart-
phones that promise the wealth of accumu-
lated human knowledge at the swipe of a
thumb. The possibilities seem infinite. But
Silicon Valley’s noösphere is creating dan-
gerous new frontiers of Turner’s evolution-
ary encounters between ‘savagery and
civilization’.

The urbanisation of evolutionary
consciousness

The first part of our story involves the way
social Darwinism was encoded into the 20th-
century hegemony of urban theory that con-
ditioned public policy, capital investment
and social analysis in the generations before
Ruth Glass (1964: xviii) first wrote the word
‘gentrification’. As industrialisation trans-
formed political economy at the beginning
of the 19th century and produced the world’s
first urbanised nation at century’s end, evo-
lutionary perspectives on urban life were
quite explicit. In Cities in Evolution, Patrick
Geddes (1915) portrayed the day’s emergent,

2520 Urban Studies 52(14)



large, polycentric city-regions – what he
called ‘conurbations’ – as the logical evolu-
tion of previous kinds of cities, in a new
industrial revolution. For Geddes, the old
‘paleotechnic’ industrial age dominated by
obsessions with individual wealth and class
division was evolving, through urbanisation,
to a ‘neo-technic order’ of collective, civic
wealth, ‘its skill directed by life towards life,
and for life .’. Humanity would set its mind
‘towards house-building and town-planning,
even towards city design; and all these upon
a scale to rival – nay, surpass – the past
glories of history’ (Geddes, 1915: 71).

Robert Ezra Park was similarly explicit
when he was strengthening the foundations
of a department of sociology at the
University of Chicago that would eventually
come to be known as ‘Urbanism,
Incorporated’ (Martindale, 1958: 28). Park’s
(1921) theoretical justification for the young
discipline – ‘the science of collective beha-
vior’ (p. 21) – combined Durkheim’s theories
of organic solidarity with the social philoso-
phies of the 19th century physical scientists
who had made sociology possible. Auguste
Comte’s (1842) ontology of ‘social physics’
offered a scientific, post-theistic positivist
theory of cumulative, intergenerational
advancement in the ‘Great Being’ of human-
ity, while Herbert Spencer’s grand synthesis
of biology and physics provided a frame-
work for the progress of industrial moder-
nity and the development of what he had
called as early as 1860 the ‘social organism’.
In turning to Spencer, Park was channelling
the evolutionary theorist with the deepest
influence on the American mind in the last
half of the 19th century. ‘Mr. Herbert
Spencer is already a power in the world’, the
Atlantic Monthly enthused in 1864; ‘As far
as the frontiers of knowledge where the
intellect may go, there is no living man
whose guidance may more safely be trusted.
Mr. Spencer represents the scientific spirit of
the age’ (Atlantic Monthly, 1864: 775, 776).

Yet that spirit was a chaotic conception of
revolutionary advances in science mangled
with the entrenched conservatism of eco-
nomics and religion. Spencer’s ‘doctrine of
the Unknowable’ provided an overriding
concession that gave theologians a credible,
face-saving reconciliation of creationism and
evolution (albeit an obsolete Lamarckian
version) while his insistence on the absolute
freedom of private enterprise made him the
philosopher of choice for America’s domi-
nant capitalists. In a Sunday-school speech,
John D Rockefeller cited Spencer’s catch-
phrase ‘the survival of the fittest’ to justify
the ‘law of nature’ and ‘the law of God’ in
the growth of the era’s powerful industrial
and financial trusts (cited in Ghent, 1902:
29). But if Park’s (1921) theorisation of the
‘collective mind’ and the ‘social conscious-
ness’ was influenced by Spencer’s linear lais-
sez-faire evolution – Spencer was, after all, a
major influence on Albion W Small, the
sociologist who hired Park at Chicago –
there were other, more progressive influ-
ences at work. Long before he came to
Chicago Sociology, Park took a low-paid
research assistant position after completing
his doctorate in order to work at Harvard
with the pragmatist philosopher William
James. Earlier still, as an undergraduate at
the University of Michigan between 1883
and 1887, Park had been deeply shaped by
the teaching of a newly arrived PhD from
Johns Hopkins – John Dewey. Of the ten
courses Park took in the philosophy depart-
ment, six were with Dewey.

Dewey fundamentally transformed
Spencer’s self-rationalising apologies for
structured social inequalities – what Dewey
(1920: 190) called ‘the apparatus for intellec-
tual justification of the established order’.
Whereas Spencer’s logic portrayed individ-
ual competition and selection in a fixed envi-
ronment, Dewey realised that Spencer
misunderstood Darwin: cooperation matters
as well as competition, and the environment

Wyly 2521



is changed by human actions – which change
over the generations as human knowledge
and tradition evolve.3 Born in the year
Darwin’s Origin of Species was published,
Dewey in later years wrote that the book
not only ‘marked an epoch in the develop-
ment of the natural sciences’, but also revo-
lutionised nearly all of the ‘conceptions that
had become the furniture of the mind’ over
2000 years, transforming ‘the logic of knowl-
edge’ across the expanding terrain of the
social sciences ‘and hence the treatment of
morals, politics, and religion’ (Dewey, 1909:
90). In America, however, these ideas had
been distorted by the brutal orthodoxy of
the ‘laissez-faire conservatives’ (Hofstadter,
1944) – the hardcore Cro-Magnons whose
extreme positions were too much even for
Richard Ely, the conservative economist
who helped fuse ‘environment, evolution,
and cartography’ by getting Frederick
Jackson Turner so interested in maps when
Turner was pursuing an otherwise classical,
non-geographical history curriculum at
Johns Hopkins (Block, 1980: 32). Ely (1884:
64) became concerned that evolutionary the-
ory was being abused ‘as an excuse for doing
nothing while people starve’, citing the ‘all-
sufficiency of competition as a plea for
grinding the poor’.

Dewey brought together Comte’s insights
on the intergenerational collective of knowl-
edge (what Marx once called the ‘general
intellect’) with Darwinian evolution. It is not
just bodies and physical characteristics that
evolve; knowledge, understanding, methods
of communication, social and cultural insti-
tutions, and human possibility evolve too.
And we can decide how to participate in our
evolution. In the same way Spencer’s dog-
matic commitment to an atomised individu-
alism had provided a fraudulent justification
for laissez-faire, ‘our ingrained habit of
regarding intelligence as an individual pos-
session’ (Dewey, 1939: 456) had thwarted
the progressive possibilities of education and

politics. ‘Intelligence is a social asset’, Dewey
(1939: 456) emphasised, ‘with a function as
public as its origin, in the concrete, in social
coöperation’. There was no need to remain
trapped by the retrograde conservatism of
Spencerian Social Darwinism, of ‘drifting’,
waiting ‘for the slow process of evolution’ as
the ‘working out of unconscious, natural
law’ (Dewey, 1918, quoted in Dewey, 1939:
424). Cooperation and the development of
the collective societal wealth of knowledge
make us active, conscious participants in our
relations with one another and with the
social and natural environments in which we
build and share knowledge. ‘It is proved
now’, Dewey wrote, ‘that it is possible for
human beings to take hold of human affairs
and manage them, to see an end which has
to be gained, a purpose which must be ful-
filled, and deliberately and intelligently go to
work to organize the means, the resources,
and the methods of accomplishing those
results’ (Dewey, 1918, quoted in Dewey,
1939: 424). Evolution is a collective, social
process that proceeds through cooperation
and communication – social relations that
were concentrating and accelerating with
urbanisation. The ‘untranscendental prag-
matist’ Dewey and the ‘empirical sociologist’
Park became America’s most perceptive ana-
lysts of how cooperative, communicative
evolution was urbanising (White and White,
1962: 155).

This is where we encounter a fascinating
yet forgotten moment in our inherited mem-
ories of urban studies. Viewed as a distant
historical reference point, Chicago School
urbanism is today understood as a van-
quished but unrepentent hegemony, as a
‘bourgeois social science’ so dominant that
Harvey (1978: 68) once likened a debate
request to ‘an invitation to the sheep to
come sit down and parley with the wolves’.
The ossified dogmatic paradigm Harvey
encountered in the last quarter of the 20th
century was a betrayal of the progressive

2522 Urban Studies 52(14)



possibilities of the first. The most crucial
potential emerges from the fascination that
Dewey, Park, and the first generation of
Chicago School sociologists had for the cen-
tral role of communications technologies in
accelerating the circulation of information
and meaning in urban society – a circulation
process that was constantly altering the very
constitution of ‘society’ and thus producing
new social environments for the collective
process of evolution of the next generation.
‘Park espoused a cognitive Darwinism’, J
Nicholas Entrikin (1980: 47) writes in a land-
mark history of human ecology, ‘in which
knowledge evolved and expanded in order to
meet the needs created by new problems’
faced by humanity. ‘Cognitive Darwinism’
might strike you as a bizarre, slightly trou-
bling phrase: Darwinian evolution requires
death to achieve progress, and ‘cognitive’
means that you are now thinking about what
it means for that progress to involve your
death. I certainly did a double-take, and
thought of my own mortality, when I first
saw the phrase in Entrikin’s brilliant histor-
iography of a figure so central to Chicago
School urban theory. The phrase has been
forgotten, with only a few exceptions (e.g.
Rescher, 1977, 2005),4 because evolutionary
urbanism developed a politicised amnesia.
Especially in America, evolutionary social
theory began to avoid explicit references to
Spencer, Darwin or any other clearly recog-
nised biological framework. Park’s work at
Chicago building a new urban theory took
place in the era of the Scopes Trial, and the
violence of the ‘War to End All Wars’ had
discredited the influential racist and imperi-
alist perversions of Darwinism that had
made so much of European civilisation and
Teutonic superiority. Likewise for the
eugenics movement that flourished from the
turn of the century, which ‘grew with such
great rapidity that by 1915 it had reached
the dimensions of a fad’, when notions of
the preservation of the ‘racial stock’ as a

‘means of national salvation’ fostered sup-
port for the geopolitical theories of ‘evolu-
tionary human geography’ led by ‘militant
nationalists’ such as Theodore Roosevelt
and his geographer, Isaiah Bowman – who,
not incidentally, declared that Turner’s
death in 1932 was ‘a loss no less severe to
American geography than to the study of
American history’ (Bowman, 1932: 499; cf.
Hofstadter, 1944: 161, 163–164; Smith, 2003:
223). The eugenics movement became politi-
cally toxic as the Nazis pursued its logic in a
refined science of genocide. In this environ-
ment, ‘[m]ention of Darwinism in the social
sciences became highly unfashionable’
(Hodgson, 2009: xix).

Despite (or perhaps because of) this hos-
tile environment, evolutionary logics quickly
mutated in ways that made them ever more
central to mainstream theories of change in
economy, society and urbanism. The para-
dox was most pronounced in economics.
The Darwinian epistemologies of Milton
Friedman’s (1953: 22) portrayal of the
maximisation-of-returns hypothesis of firm
survival in terms of ‘natural selection’ and
Thorstein Veblen’s proposal for a recon-
struction of economics as a ‘post-Darwinian’
science were downplayed in favour of the
technocratic, neutral discourses that were
coming to define American logical positi-
vism (Hodgson, 2003a; Mirowski, 2005).5

The institutional and evolutionary econo-
mist Geoffrey Hodgson (2003a: 93) notes
that as late as the establishment of the
Association for Evolutionary Economics in
1966, the label ‘evolutionary’ was adopted
‘only by ridding it of any of its former and
Veblenian connections with Darwinism and
by interpreting it in the broad and banal
sense of ‘‘change’’’. And yet Darwinism had
always been a ‘derivative of political econ-
omy’ (Hofstadter, 1944: 38), what Donald
MacKenzie (1976: 503) calls ‘the biological
variant of political economy’. Darwin
struggled for more than a year after his

Wyly 2523



expeditions on the Beagle trying to make
sense of his samples and empirical observa-
tions, but it was only after he read a book
on the political economy of population that
he ‘at last got a theory by which to work’.6

The theory that Darwin finally got –
Malthus’s (1798) Essay on the Principle of
Population – had become one of the defini-
tive manifestos of the 19th century. Darwin
was reading the sixth edition, published in
1826 (Secord, 2008: xix), and it helped break
his writer’s block as he worked out the
details of his theory – until the discovery
that the naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace
was pursuing the same line of inquiry led to
a simultaneous announcement at the 1858
meeting of the Linnaean Society in London.
‘Since it had been one of the great figures of
the classical economic tradition who had led
Spencer, Darwin, and Wallace toward their
evolutionary theories’, the historian Richard
Hofstadter (1944: 144) observes, ‘the econo-
mists might have had some justification for
proclaiming that biology had merely univer-
salized a truth that had been in their posses-
sion for a long time’. The core of economics
had always privileged laissez-faire competi-
tion as a ‘doctrine of social selection’
(Hofstadter, 1944: 144), and Keynes (1926:
113) went so far as to declare that ‘the prin-
ciple of the Survival of the Fittest could be
regarded as one vast generalization of the
Ricardian economics’.

From the 1940s through the 1960s during
the period Hodgson (2009: xix) labels ‘The
Dark Age of Darwinism in Economics’, the
field’s foundational implicit social
Darwinism conditioned the development of
conventional urban theory, as neoclassical
economic methodology was enmeshed with
Chicago sociology frameworks for analysing
neighbourhoods, cities and metropolitan
regions. Classical economics and social
Darwinism were both founded on an axio-
matic trinity: (1) ‘the fundamentally self-
interested animal’ maximising utility

(survival), (2) the normality and universality
of competition, and (3) the survival of the
organism/producer/worker most efficiently
adapted to its environment. Yet while ‘both
classical economics and natural selection
were doctrines of natural law’ (Hofstadter,
1944: 145), the 20th-century consolidation of
econometrics created an entirely new infra-
structure in which social Darwinist processes
could be embedded in the technocratically
scientific and presumptively neutral, objec-
tive mechanisms of simultaneous equations,
general and partial equilibrium solutions,
and marginal productivity estimates as
applied to the exploding observational vistas
of economic data. The methodological gen-
ealogy goes all the way down, to a literally
embodied Darwinian lineage: we would not
have the correlation coefficient if Darwin’s
cousin, the eugenicist Francis Galton and
author of Hereditary Genius (1869) had not
been so obsessed with the ‘Gaussian Law of
Error’ describing the variations around the
averages of physical measures of human
bodies (biometrics) and the ‘mental peculia-
rities of different races’ (p. v); those varia-
tions around the mean ‘could be made the
source of intellectual progress: specifically
for Galton’s purposes geniuses could be
made’ (Barnes, 1998: 213). And in turn we
would not have chi-square or regression if
Karl Pearson had not been so anxious to
‘provide his particular form of Darwinism
with a proper scientific basis’ (Norton, 1978:
6) and if he had not been inspired in 1890 to
focus on statistics after meeting a zoology
professor, Walter Weldon, who was infusing
Galton’s ideas into evolutionary biology to
create a ‘mathematical theory of evolution’
(Norton, 1978: 6). When Galton died, his
financial remains allowed Pearson to
become the first Galton Professor of
Eugenics at University College, London,
and to merge the two laboratories he
directed – the Biometric Laboratory and the
Galton Laboratory for National Eugenics –

2524 Urban Studies 52(14)



into the Department of Applied Statistics.
The Galton legacy of correlation and the
dismal-science moralism of Malthus that
inspired Darwin almost crossed paths with
the noösphere and urban studies at the inter-
national symposium in Princeton, New
Jersey in 1955 (‘Man’s Role in Changing the
Face of the Earth’) where Father Teilhard
was scheduled to present his paper, ‘The
Antiquity and World Expansion of Human
Culture’ (de Chardin, 1956). Teilhard didn’t
make it, but Patrick Geddes’ American aco-
lyte Lewis Mumford did, and so did Sir
Charles Galton Darwin (grandson of the
Darwin), delivering a neomalthusian warn-
ing on ‘the menace of world overpopulation’
and outlining a ‘rather fanciful exaggeration’
in the form of a scenario of a ‘genetic sur-
geon’ working to improve humanity by dis-
tilling all of the accumulated knowledge of
the chromosomes of humanity ‘to produce
an embryo which will develop into’ a ‘really
great man’: ‘Shakespeare, Newton,
Napoleon, or – let us be broadminded, since
we cannot foresee the political tastes of the
surgeon – perhaps Marx’ (Darwin, 1956:
965).7

To be sure, this discussion takes us a long
way from the familiar debates of the gentrifi-
cation literatures. But this context was cru-
cial in shaping urban social theory at a
pivotal moment, when vivid memories of the
environmental determinism of Turner’s day
(see Block, 1980) jostled awkwardly with a
new evolutionary mainstream from econom-
ics, mathematics and physics (Berry, 1978,
1980) and the aspirations of the social
sciences’ quantitative revolutions. In the
industrialised urbanism of America, these
tensions could be resolved through the
implicitly Darwinian economics of ‘applied
statistics’ and the ‘imperial conquests of the
rational actor model’ (Hodgson, 2003b: x)
fused with Chicago School human ecology –
yielding a comprehensive and internally con-
sistent matrix of policy-relevant theory.

Housing filtering metaphors emphasised
households’ adaptive responses to the
changing landscape of old and new homes in
the expanding metropolis (Lowry, 1960).
Neighbourhood ‘life cycle’ theories natura-
lised the hierarchical processes of ‘upward’
status mobility via suburbanisation, and
‘downward’ spirals of decline with racial
transition in the inner city (Metzger, 2000).
The deeply influential Alonso–Muth
(Alonso, 1964; Muth, 1969) formulation of
spatial equilibrium had the effect of conceal-
ing the ruthless struggles of urban class com-
petition behind the elegant calculus of
market-clearing locational bid-rent curves.
The explicit ethno-racial hierarchies that
structured the spatial evolution of the
American metropolis – such as Homer
Hoyt’s (1933: 314–316) famous ranking of
the effect of different racial groups on neigh-
bourhood rents in Chicago, from ‘English,
Scotch and Scandinavians’ at the top to
‘Negroes and Mexicans’ at the bottom –
emerged from interwar America’s putrid
stew of market democracy and populist
Spencerian eugenic racist thought. But all
could safely be hidden in the multivariate
masquerade of hedonic pricing models and
the economic discourse of ‘property values’
as a floating signifier for the dangers of dif-
ference.8 And the entire theoretical appara-
tus was hard-wired as the default setting in
the mainframes of urban public policy
through the deceptively obscure accounting
jargon of ‘highest and best use’, distracting
attention from the political contradictions of
property rights in capitalist urban planning
(Krueckeberg, 1995).

This is the historical context that shaped
the discourse and analysis of gentrification
in urban theory: social Darwinist competi-
tion disguised in the naturalised narratives of
Chicago-School urban ecology and quanti-
fied neoclassical equilibrium. Initial
responses to the empirical realities of a pro-
cess that defied the expectations of

Wyly 2525



mainstream urban theory were dominated
by the analysis of individual consumer pre-
ference: if gentrification defied the predic-
tions of Alonso bid-rent curves, then
obviously the explanation was a shift in the
‘indifference curves’ of wealthy and middle-
class households re-evaluating the tradeoffs
of time, space and accessibility (Schill and
Nathan, 1983; Stegman, 1969; Wheaton,
1977).9 These tautological pivots became the
targets for the new revolution in urban the-
ory when Harvey (1973: 135) sardonically
observed, ‘All this actually means is that the
rich group can always enforce its preferences
over a poor group because it has more
resources’ to exploit all the dimensions of
competitive bid-rents. Similarly, Neil
Smith’s first analysis of the transformation
of Philadelphia’s Society Hill was aimed
squarely at Urbanism, Incorporated: ‘The
Chicago School’s latter-day followers have
bequeathed to urban geography an empiri-
cist and ecological quagmire in which sub-
stantive theory nearly drowned’, Smith
(1977: 7) wrote in the opening pages of his
undergraduate honours thesis. This was the
first salvo of a lifetime project of politics
and research devoted to challenging the
friendly, market-tested violence of the ‘con-
sumer sovereignty’ logics that built the foun-
dations of aggressive, state-driven neoliberal
urbanism and populist middle-class support
for revanchist wars on the poor and home-
less. Nevertheless, despite the incisive rigour
and political integrity of a generation of crit-
ical perspectives on gentrification, an impor-
tant genealogical insight has been neglected:
the entanglement of gentrification with the
suppressed memories of social Darwinism.
We have forgotten how explicit Glass was in
making this connection. Only a few lines
after describing how ‘modest mews and cot-
tages’ became ‘elegant, expensive residences’
in an ‘invasion’ spreading from Hampstead
and Chelsea to Islington, Paddington, North
Kensington and even the ‘shady’ parts of

Notting Hill, Glass reminded readers of the
‘neomalthusian’ Depression-era assumptions
of the Greater London Plan of 1944. The
Plan had been amended in 1947 to imple-
ment what we would now recognise as neoli-
beralism: ‘development rights have been
de-nationalized; development values have
been ‘‘liberated’’’ (Glass, 1964: xx). Along
with the weakening of rent controls, these
measures quickly accelerated the polarisa-
tion of the metropolis:

In such circumstances, any district in or near
London, however dingy or unfashionable
before, is likely to become expensive; and
London may quite soon be a city which illus-
trates the principle of the survival of the fittest
– the financially fittest, who can still afford to

work and live there. (Not long ago, the then
Housing Minister advised those who cannot
pay the price to move out.) (Glass, 1964: xx)

Decolonising the new urban
colonialism?

The second part of our story involves a para-
dox of politics, theory and discourse in the
half-century since Ruth Glass wrote these
words. Can anyone deny that London is a
city that illustrates the survival of the finan-
cially fittest? From all over the world, the
financially fittest capitalists are bidding the
top end of the residential market above the
US$100 million mark in London and New
York (New York Times, 2015), as the ‘uber-
rich’ buy homes as ‘safe-deposit boxes’ for
cash (Rees, 2015). We are now at half that
level in Vancouver, where a one-time CEO
of the San Francisco social media game-
maker Zynga recently sold a 25,000 square-
foot home for $51.8 million Canadian dol-
lars; the buyer heads a conglomerate with
interests in property development, pharma-
ceuticals, hotel management and textiles.
The buyer grew up in poverty and did not
finish high school, and he failed at his first

2526 Urban Studies 52(14)



business venture – a duck farm (Lee-Young,
2015: A6). But Chen Mailin persevered and
succeeded; he has worked his way to the top,
just as Rockefeller in a previous century,
and he is a hot trending topic in Hong
Kong, Singapore and Taiwan. But represent-
ing a city – even a big city such as Nanjing –
in the PRC’s People’s Political Consultative
Committee is not as secure as it once was.
Things could change.10

All around the world, the ‘financially fit-
test’ who have survived and thrived in the
creative destruction of capitalism’s ecosys-
tem (especially in those growth frontiers of
savage competition that ‘pair capitalism
with authoritarianism’, Dorfmann, 2015) are
bidding up real-estate prices in a planet-wide
search for what the Vancouver urban plan-
ner Andy Yan calls ‘hedge cities’ – safe
places to store capital in real estate as insur-
ance for an uncertain future.11 These circuits
– what Tom Slater (2015) has carefully
theorised as ‘planetary rent gaps’ – are now
the subject once again of evolutionary social
physics models and frontier metaphors that
would be all too familiar to Robert Park
and Frederick Jackson Turner. The prolific
science writer Philip Ball – an editor at
Nature and contributor to the Financial
Times who has chronicled the new field of
‘econophysics’ (Ball, 2006) – writes a story
in the Guardian making the case that
‘Gentrification is a natural evolution’, based
on a paper published in the journal Physics
and Society. Those authors, Ball (2014) tells
us, ‘are studying city evolution much as biol-
ogists study natural evolution – almost as if
the city itself were a natural organism’ –
what Jane Jacobs called ‘the spontaneous
self-organization of urban environments’.
Mark Buchanan, another Nature editor,
chronicles the ‘quantum revolution’ of
‘social physics’ in the example of Thomas
Schelling’s ‘atomic physics’ interpretation of
the ‘social cascades’ that took place at the
‘fringe between civilization and lawlessness’:

Times Square (all quotes from Buchanan,
2007: x, 102, 22). The pioneers in this lawless
urban fringe included Viacom, Bertelsmann,
Morgan Stanley and the Walt Disney
Company. Similarly, Ed Glaeser – a 21st
century Richard Ely who has become the
celebrity intellectual du jour among the
world’s leading capitalists, praises cities –
but only those dynamic, entrepreneurial
free-market cities that ‘speed innovation by
connecting their smart inhabitants to each
other’, serve as ‘gateways between cultures
and markets’ or as ‘gateway[s] to ideas’
(Glaeser, 2011: 7). For Glaeser, the city, col-
lective humanity’s greatest invention, ‘makes
us richer, smarter, greener, healthier, and
happier’, and it makes us an ‘urban species’.
But we are also a gentrifying species, and a
gregarious, networked species. Tom Slater
(2014) strikes up an email correspondence
with Ball, and publishes an eloquent
response: ‘There is Nothing Natural About
Gentrification’. The apparent sophistication
of complexity theory used to predict where
gentrification will happen next should not
confuse us, Slater warns; this is ‘a dangerous
diversion towards social Darwinism’, ignor-
ing ‘structural forces of power, politics, pol-
icy, and privilege’. Not long after Spike Lee
is heard on an audio recording at a Pratt
Institute lecture honouring African
American History Month calling the gentri-
fication of Fort Greene ‘Motherfuckin’
Christopher Columbus syndrome’, a New
York Times editorial manager sends a note
to the newsroom asking reporters to please
stop describing neighbourhoods in every city
from Beijing to Cape Town in terms of how
much they resemble hipster Brooklyn
(Nguyen, 2014). But it was already too late.
The ‘#Christophercolumbussyndrome’ hash-
tag entered the twittersphere and was care-
fully dissected in an article in the daily
online Spanish finance and politics site El
Confidential – ‘Es el puto sı́ndrome do
Christóbal Colón’ (Garcı́a-Ajofrin, 2014) –

Wyly 2527



amidst powerful structural imperatives. In
the early 1970s when Harvey and Smith
were first refining Lefebvre’s theory of the
capital-switching dynamics of the produc-
tion of urban space, global capital had to
find profitable investment opportunities for
about US$6 billion of annual surplus value;
now that figure is more than US$2 trillion
every year (Harvey, 2014: 228). Most of that
is going into cities. And almost a century
after Robert Park declared the city a prod-
uct of human nature and Patrick Geddes
foresaw a ‘neotechnic order’, the technolo-
gies of unprecedented planetary connectivity
are accelerating the evolution of accumula-
tion away from the old industrial capital of
the Global North towards the new informa-
tional empires as well as cosmopolitan capi-
tal of all kinds from the Global South. John
D Rockefeller and Andrew Carnegie are
replaced by Bill Gates, Tim Cooke, Mark
Zuckerberg and Rupert Murdoch, but also
by Chen Mailin, Jack Ma, Carlos Slim and
Mukesh Ambani. Planetary connectivity is
also allowing the kinds of communication
that Park and Dewey first theorised at the
scale of the city to now reach the scale of
Lefebvre’s planetary urbanisation. Woven
from contextual blends of indigenous local
processes and fast-moving policy innova-
tions, gentrification has gone global.

Let me be clear on this point. When I
argue that gentrification has gone global, I
am not suggesting that the phenomenon
Ruth Glass identified in London in the
1960s – and that many researchers have
investigated and discussed in subsequent
years – began in the Global North and has
now been simply copied or applied in cities
of the Global South. Gentrification (as a
process, not a word) has a deeper history
and a wider geographical lineage than is usu-
ally recognised (Lees et al., 2015a, 2015b).
Rather, I contend that the varied forms of
the competitive class reshaping of urban
space that have always defined urban

modernity are sufficiently pervasive and
transnationally connected through flows of
ideas, money and aspirations to be reason-
ably considered part of something ‘global’ in
reach and influence.

As gentrification has gone global, so have
Frederick Jackson Turner’s frontier meta-
phors. They are on the ground and in the
cloud, in the streets and in the tweets, as the
frontier as ‘a moving section’, a ‘form of
society’ (Turner in 1914, quoted in Bowman,
1932: 499) replaces Charles Galton Darwin’s
(1956) ‘genetic surgeon’ with an emergent
transnational social field of escalating multi-
cultural competitions in education, employ-
ment and housing. One future of
gentrification is clear from Ley’s (2010: 82)
analysis of Vancouver’s position at the
nexus of ‘a dispersed social and spatial field’
of ‘trans-pacific life-lines’ for competitive,
entrepreneurial middle-class and elite fami-
lies that incorporate ‘the capital-generating
station of East Asia with the family-
nurturing station of Canada into a single
life-world’. Such transnational fields are
now apparent across a growing number of
cities, and fortunes are being made by those
entrepreneurial pioneers of the noösphere
who move quickest to adapt and exploit the
new ‘science of collective behavior’ (Park,
1921) on the frontiers of transnational spa-
tial fixes of informational capital. The pro-
cesses Harvey (1989: chapter 8) diagnosed a
generation ago as the ‘urbanization of con-
sciousness’ are now operating through a glo-
bal noösphere in an interconnected,
evolutionary and variegated planetary
urbanisation.

As situated, embodied and urbanising
individuals, each of us can see, understand
or experience particular empirical facets of
this latest urban revolution – and now bil-
lions of us are also able to talk, learn and
fight about it in real time, in the evolution-
ary algorithmic ecosystems of social media.
No wonder John Sexton, with that doctorate

2528 Urban Studies 52(14)



in religion from the Jesuits, thinks in
Teilhardian terms. He is in the noöspheric
administration of one of the most exclusive
private universities in one of the world’s
most widely recognised epicentres of gentri-
fication, where admission requires a ‘super-
stage of consciousness’ of grades, test scores
and extracurricular achievements – along
with ever-escalating tuition payments and a
Hunger Games survival of the financially fit-
test competition in the City’s housing mar-
ket. NYU’s ‘real-estate footprint’ in
Greenwich Village and Brooklyn has grown
by more than 2 million square feet in the
past decade, while Sexton responds to critics
of the ‘globalization of the university’ by
contextualising the competition: ‘I live in a
city where the people with all the choices, all
the money, all the information, kill to get
their kids into $35,000 kindergartens’
(quoted in Carapezza and Noe-Payne,
2014). He is right, and so is Spike Lee when
he describes the cutthroat competition of
White parents to get their kids into private
schools,12 and when he describes the next
generation of pioneers in Harlem: ‘When
you see White mothers pushing their babies
in strollers, three o’clock in the morning on
125th Street, that must tell you something’
(quoted in Coscarelli, 2014). Meanwhile, the
acceptance rate for NYU Abu Dhabi’s sec-
ond entering class stood at 2.6% – a group
of slackers compared to the previous year’s
1.2% – and NYU Shanghai’s recruitment
criteria have been fully integrated with
China’s informational intravenous drip13

gaokao National College Entrance
Examination. Even so, Sexton’s Teihardian
new frontier of ‘idea capitals’ cannot always
evade the Limits to Capital (Harvey, 1982):
NYU’s Tisch Asia biz-school gamble in
Singapore failed after a cascade of embar-
rassing financial and management crises.

This is the new urban frontier, half a cen-
tury after Ruth Glass established the link
between gentrification and the survival of

the financially fittest in the global city.
Unfortunately, critical perspectives on pla-
netary gentrification have been distorted by
a new paradox of theory, politics and prac-
tice. A half-century of theory and discourse
built to analyse the causes and consequences
of the systemic socio-spatial inequalities of
gentrification – what Atkinson and Bridge
(2005) call the ‘new urban colonialism’ – is
now itself under scrutiny as a colonial impo-
sition. Considering the catastrophic history
of evolutionary hierarchies and developmen-
tal teleologies that continue to define the
colonial present, this new challenge can be
seen as a cosmopolitan, emancipatory evolu-
tion beyond the narrow view from Anglo-
America – what Jim Blaut (1993) famously
called the ‘colonizer’s model of the world’
(see also Baptista, 2013; Harris, 2008; Lees
et al., 2015a, 2015b; McCann et al., 2013;
Ren, 2015).

The cosmopolitan decolonisation of
gentrification

Three recent landmarks in the gentrification
literature offer lucid expressions of this new
critical view. First, Thomas Maloutas (2011)
offers an eloquent and strident challenge to
the contemporary geographical and theoreti-
cal expansion of gentrification research.
Gentrification, Maloutas argues, is ‘highly
dependent on contextual causality’, and no
amount of conceptual reconstruction can
‘remove its original contextual attachment to
the Anglo-American metropolis’ (p. 34). For
Maloutas, the ‘spatiotemporal stretching’ of
definitions of gentrification is not only a
‘regression in conceptual clarity and hence
theoretical rigor’ (p. 36), but has itself
become a part of the established Anglo-
American hegemony of academic knowledge
production; ‘there are authors from far less
commensurable contexts that are increas-
ingly compelled to label changes within
urban centres as gentrification’ (p. 37), even

Wyly 2529



when the conclusion is analytically inap-
propriate. ‘It is somewhat ironic that radical
thinkers like Saskia Sassen and Neil Smith
contribute indirectly to this effect’, Maloutas
(2011: 42) argues, ‘by reinforcing the image
of neoliberal omnipotence through their cri-
tique of a regulation model that bursts out
of its contextual confines due to the Anglo-
American domination in the discipline’.
Maloutas is deeply concerned with the simul-
taneous, mutually reinforcing disempower-
ment of researchers and theoretical concepts
from the Global South, and the ‘contextual
blindness’ of researchers in the Anglo-
American core – and thus he concurs with
Butler’s (2007: 163) response to Atkinson
and Bridge’s (2005) diagnosis of a ‘new
urban colonialism’: ‘the issue of ‘‘neocoloni-
alism’’ is as much with the use and definition
of the term as with its consequences’.

Second, Loretta Lees (2012: 156) has
recently challenged us to move ‘away from
an ‘‘imitative urbanism’’ (from the idea that
gentrification in the Global North has tra-
velled to and been copied in the Global
South) towards a ‘‘cosmopolitan urbanism’’
(where gentrification in the Global South
has a more expanded imagination)’. Lees
(2012: 158) gives us a clear warning: ‘We
should not read gentrification in the Global
South as simply the recreation of the periph-
ery (the urban South) in the image of the
supposed centre (London or New York)’.
Lees calls for postcolonial comparative
urbanist analysis of the ‘hybridity of neoli-
beralism’, and ‘new, indigenous, and cosmo-
politan theorizations’ of gentrification in the
Global South as well as the Global North.

Third, in a valuable, deeply contextua-
lised analysis of the curious absence of gen-
trification discourse amidst the dramatic
urban transformations of Hong Kong,
David Ley and Sin Yih Teo (2013) explore
the intricate ambiguities between epistemol-
ogy and ontology. Drawing on Aihwa Ong’s
(1999) concept of ‘alternative Asian

modernities’, Ley and Teo document a
chorus of voices from the Asia-Pacific that
challenge the dominant Anglo-American
narratives of neoliberalisation – emphasising
instead the distinctive built forms and politi-
cal processes that culminate in the synthesis
of market and state power in the constitu-
tion of a ‘joint urban project’ (p. 14). Urban
renewal is fused with national developmen-
tal imperatives. Crucially, this alternative
Asian modernity holds out the promise, Ley
and Teo (2013: 1) write, ‘most surprising
from a Western perspective’, of ‘a poten-
tially progressive dimension for some
impacted residents’ through systems of
negotiated compensation and broad
improvements in housing conditions. ‘[T]he
cultural hegemony of property in Hong
Kong and other parts of East Asia makes
redevelopment of some low-income districts
a more ambivalent process’, Ley and Teo
conclude, ‘for locked within the displace-
ment of redevelopment is the hope of a
negotiated settlement with the state leading
to improved housing’.

This emergent movement for a ‘cosmopo-
litan decolonisation’ of gentrification
research expresses the best of intentions –
and, in crucial ways, the very best achieve-
ments of cutting-edge idealist innovation in
critical theories that have become deeply
reflexive, sensitive to context and committed
to emancipatory possibilities in the ‘pro-
cesses of ascendence, emergence, and con-
testation that defy the grid of postcolonial
world systems’ (Roy, 2011: 308; cf. Ong,
2011). It challenges those of us who write
from and about gentrification in the Global
North to look beyond the narrow confiness
of Northern cities, while also realising, as
Maloutas (2011: 43) reminds us, that only a
tiny fraction of the world’s urbanites live in
‘the core cities that set the ways of seeing
and understanding socio-spatial change that
often become the deforming lenses through
which we examine what happens in the rest’.

2530 Urban Studies 52(14)



Yet our deferential reverence to the analyti-
cal sophistication of cosmopolitan contin-
gency intensifies a striking paradox: today’s
postcolonial theory has achieved what
Global North growth-machine operatives
have been trying to do ever since the Real
Estate Board of New York took out expen-
sive ads on the editorial page of the New
York Times, asking ‘Is Gentrification a
Dirty Word?’ (Smith, 1996). ‘Oh, we don’t
have any gentrification here’, an ‘eminent
researcher of the rise of the Taiwanese mid-
dle class’ tells Eric Clark (2015: 453) on a
research visit to Taipei, in a confident asser-
tion of the kind repeated at every opportu-
nity, in every language, by developers, state
officials and professionals in every city that
is being remade, rebuilt, regenerated,
renewed or revitalised. Alternative urban
modernities that defy the contextual specifi-
cities of Anglo-American gentrification
while showcasing how ‘diverse actors and
institutions invent and aspire to new ways of
being global’ (Ong, 2011: 23) nevertheless
involve the displacement of nearly a tenth of
Shanghai’s population in a single decade
(Iossifova, 2009), 720,000 for the Seoul
Olympics (Centre on Housing Rights and
Evictions (COHRE), 2007), 3.45 million
across the Asia-Pacific between 2003 and
2006 (COHRE, 2006), and at least 1.5 mil-
lion for the Beijing Olympics (Shin, 2012).
Along with the uncounted millions displaced
by the kinder, gentler violence of market
forces, these are the costs for which the cos-
mopolitan turn provides no vocabulary, no
language of questions or resistance. There is
a world of difference between a politics that
challenges gentrification as the new urban
colonialism (Atkinson and Bridge, 2005)
and one that attacks the terminology, theory
and politics of the critical analysis of gentrifi-
cation as an apparatus of colonial domina-
tion. This would not be the first time that
critical sensibilities of an inclusive, progres-
sive poststructuralism were hijacked to serve

the purposes of deeply retrograde authori-
tarian alliances (compare Smith, 2009 with
The Editors, Urban Geography, 2015 for per-
spectives on ‘Western’ and ‘Eastern’ variants
of authoritarian state coercion).

At precisely the moment when gentrifica-
tion is becoming truly transnational and
powerfully planetary, we are asked to liqui-
date the intellectual and political invest-
ments of generations of critical inquiry in
favour of evolving theories of ‘globalized
contingency’ that have now even attacked
postcolonial theory itself as ‘hegemonic’
(Ong, 2011: 3, 8).

There can be no doubt that we need an
‘expanded geographical imagination’ (Lees,
2012) to understand the varied and cosmo-
politan causes, textures and consequences of
the class transformation of urban space in
different circumstances. Yet for three
decades now, gentrification researchers have
undertaken comparative inquiry with a deep
sensitivity to the ‘contingency and complex-
ity, set within the structural dimensions of
advanced capitalism’ that Beauregard (1986:
35) called for; Lees et al. (2015b: 6) review
the ‘significant debate in the 1990s about the
contextual nature of gentrification’, and cite
a wide range of contextual and/or compara-
tive gentrification studies beyond the ‘usual
suspects’. Today, however, as the ‘advanced
capitalism’ once synonymous with the
Global North shifts to the urban growth
frontiers of the Global South, the ‘cosmopo-
litan decolonisation’ of gentrification theory
abandons the analytical and political poten-
tial of all of this work. Lees et al. (2015b: 7)
highlight the stakes when introducing their
new edited collection of genuinely cosmopo-
litan and pluralist analyses of ‘global
gentrifications’:

Without a gentrification theory that serves as
an ‘umbrella’. the debate we are holding now
in this book would probably not exist, neither
would most of the gentrification debates held

Wyly 2531



hitherto by scholars in different contexts, and
nor would urban activists around the world be
able to identify the different types of
redevelopment-led displacement that are in
many ways part of the same repertoire of class
restructuring in global capitalism.

Moreover, the central features of an alleg-
edly distinctive Asian urban paradigm –
aggressive and comprehensive state plan-
ning, contested yet significant systems of
relocation and compensation, and what
Maloutas calls the ‘cross-class national
pride’ of urban modernisation – only present
a contradiction of gentrification theory if we
retreat to the most narrow, obsolete and
rigid definitions tied to ‘classical’ Glass-style
spontaneous invasion-and-succession of par-
ticular inner-city neighbourhoods, thus
ignoring the vast, interdisciplinary and con-
textual literatures on urban renewal, state-
driven gentrification and intensified capitali-
sations of home and urban life involved in
far-flung transnational networks of real-
estate securitisation, development and specu-
lation (Harris, 2008; Lees et al., 2010; Shao,
2013; Slater, 2015; Smith, 2002, 2010).
Indeed, it is far more meaningful to suggest
that the contextual, indigenous fusion of the
‘process of value extraction from the built
environment’ (Lees et al., 2015a: 441) with
consolidated Asian nation-state power and
popular consent in the assemblage of devel-
opment models and tactics from ‘parts of
elsewhere’ (Allen and Cochrane, 2007: 1171)
in the ‘nodes of an emergent global order
marked by the ascendancy of Asian power-
houses, from the Gulf States to India and
China’ (McCann et al., 2013: 585) – all of
this constitutes the refined achievement of a
gentrification project that is far more effec-
tive than anything ever accomplished in the
Anglo-American world. It is testament to
the success of gentrification in developmen-
tal states that the word ‘gentrification’ is so
rarely used: a pre-emptive eviction of the
term helps delay and suppress the politics of

resistance (Slater, 2009), and in any event,
resistance is always a marginalised minority
against the discursive and material popular-
ity of the ‘spatialised production of new
middle-class urban identities’ (this is Harris’s
(2008: 2415) memorable phrase inspired by
Fernandes’ (2006) analysis of India’s new
middle class). Ley and Teo (2013), however,
document a recent ‘ontological awakening’
amidst worsening inequality in Hong Kong,
while there are other indications of instabil-
ity in the 21st century’s dialectical response
to the Chicago School – the ‘Chinese excep-
tionalism’ urban paradigm (Ren, 2015;
cf. The Editors, Urban Geography, 2015).
No matter what it is called – urban renewal,
regeneration, development, modernisation,
the cultural hegemony of property, the spa-
tialised production of new middle-class
urban identities, the ‘often invisible, unquan-
tifiable’ ‘human wreckage’ of a domicide
translated as chaiqian (demolition + reloca-
tion) (Shao, 2013: 2), or the 2010 Shanghai
World Exposition’s unbridled optimism of
‘Better City, Better Life!’ – this is the
nationalisation of gentrification within the
transnational interconnections of planetary
urbanisation. This is the essence of gentrifi-
cation, not its Other.

Gentrification and the noösphere

My third claim is the most provocative,
because it puts me in the position of attack-
ing the emancipatory narratives of multicul-
tural meritocracies of competition in
technology, creativity and education.
Contemporary gentrification is a recombi-
nant urbanism of old and new, defined by
competitive processes accelerated through
the algorithmic transformation of market
relations in housing, labour and education.
Silicon Valley’s noösphere involves an
unprecedented and unapologetic planetary
colonisation by the West: Facebook’s plans
for a fleet of a thousand high-altitude drones

2532 Urban Studies 52(14)



flying over 4G LTE terra incognitae to con-
nect the unnetworked savages is code-named
Aquila, for the classical-mythology eagle
carrying Jupiter’s thunderbolts to the sky.
Algorithmic imperialism is reproducing dan-
gerous new frontiers of Turner’s evolution-
ary logics in dynamic transnational urban
networks of class competition. In an essay
written not long before his ‘Evolution of
Gentrification’ chapter, Neil Smith (2009:
54) challenged the idealism of poststructur-
alism for ‘engender[ing] the implicit assump-
tion that to change the world it is necessary
first and foremost to change the discourse’,
as against the structured material inequal-
ities of class in the capitalist mode of pro-
duction. Yet this distinction has quickly
blurred in the years since the global financial
crisis, as the most dynamic frontiers of capi-
tal accumulation are now pursuing the com-
modification and monetisation of discourse
itself on a planetary scale. Apple first sur-
passed Exxon in August of 2011 to become
the world’s most valuable company in terms
of market capitalisation, and is now valued
at US$719 billion; Facebook’s market cap,
at US$232 billion, recently surpassed JP
Morgan; Google posted revenues of US$66
billion last year (2014), 89% from advertis-
ing. If we take a broad view of the old and
new names in cognitive-cultural capitalism
(Scott, 2007, 2011a, 2011b) ranked by mar-
ket capitalisation, we see Apple, Google,
Microsoft, China Mobile, Facebook,
Verizon, Oracle, Disney, Amazon, AT&T,
IBM, Comcast, Intel, Cisco, Taiwan
Semiconductor and Qualcomm; this is a
combined market capitalisation of US$3.66
trillion devoted to an informational mode of
production in which the human attention
span is being assembled into a transnational
resource to be dynamically measured, man-
aged and mined. Poststructuralism is the
new retail frontier14 for Wall Street finance,
Silicon Valley venture capital and technolo-
gical innovation, and a remarkably

cosmopolitan global alliance of emergent
middle classes, political elites, and energetic,
idealistic students in a variegated planetary
urbanisation of cognitive capitalism.

In this context, a wider array of individu-
als, firms, public and private institutions in
cities – even the most ‘ordinary’ cities
(Robinson, 2006) – are forced to compete
and adapt across an increasingly dynamic,
insecure and expanding networked noö-
sphere of accelerating measurement and
marketisation in housing, employment and
education. Urban assets – their real-estate
markets, their educational institutions, their
‘human capital’ – are all being mobilised
more aggressively, more creatively and more
rapidly in the pursuit of endless compound
growth and capital accumulation (Harvey,
2014; Smith, 2002). Cognitive capital accu-
mulation, however, is much more agile
compared with the old growth-machine
urbanism of the industrial age – and it offers
alluring images of inclusion, opportunity
and diversity in Richard Florida’s globally
circulating ‘3T’ formula for urban success:
technology, talent and tolerance. ‘In the
Creative Age’, Florida (2003: 17) empha-
sises, ‘the mind itself becomes the mode of
production, so to speak’, and the shift from
an economy based on material inputs to one
driven by intellectual resources elevates the
importance of meritocracies – measurable
and quickly adaptive meritocracies – in
workplace divisions of labour and in the col-
leges and universities that function as ‘talent
machines’ in the ‘new global competition for
talent’ (Florida, 2006). Together, all of the
interdependent processes by which the ‘basic
cognitive-cultural system of production’ is
‘transforming the economic foundations of
many large metropolitan areas all over the
world’ (Scott, 2011b: 289) are dissolving the
relevance of the sharp categorical distinc-
tions and polarising binaries of the gentrifi-
cation debates: demand-side and supply-side
causal explanations (Hamnett, 1991; Ley,

Wyly 2533



1987; Smith, 1987), the role of ethnoracial
and cultural lifeworlds as opposed to the cal-
culative rationalities of profit and loss
(Knopp, 1997; Rose, 1984; Taylor, 2003),
and the fine-grained morphological differ-
ences among residential, retail, and indus-
trial redevelopment, or ‘classical’ versus
‘new-build’ reinvestment (Davidson and
Lees, 2010; Lambert and Boddy, 2002).
Each of these lineages of theoretical and
political debate is important so long as gen-
trification is understood as a spatially
bounded process that happens in specific,
localised city neighbourhoods with distinc-
tive histories and built-environment charac-
teristics. These issues matter less when
gentrification is understood as a dimension of
planetary urbanisation, as Merrifield (2013:
916) frames it: ‘The urban brings everything
together, and transforms everything in that
coming together: capital and goods, people
and information, activity and conflict, confron-
tation and cooperation’. If we take Lefebvre
(2003[1970]: 118–119) seriously, the urban is
pure process: ‘a place of encounter, assembly,
simultaneity’, but a non-place, a:

concrete abstraction, associated with practice.
. the urban accumulates all content. But it is
more than accumulation. Its content (things,
objects, people, situations) are mutually exclu-

sive because they are diverse, but inclusive
because they are brought together and imply
their mutual presence. The urban is both form
and receptacle, void and plentitude, superob-
ject and nonobject, superconsciousness and
the totality of consciousness.

What does this mean for the evolution of
gentrification? When understood as a dimen-
sion of planetary urbanisation, gentrification
is no longer confined to a false choice
between the chaos and complexity of loca-
lised geographical contingency as opposed
to the order and simplicity of land, property
and class (compare Beauregard, 1986, with
Clark, 2005). Gentrification is, as ever, the

upward class transformation of urban space.
Just as planetary urbanisation redefines the
ontology of ‘urban’, however, ‘class’ can and
does take on altered meanings in cognitive
capitalism. The axes of class analysis are rea-
ligned both for Marxian conceptualisations
in relation to the means of production of
surplus value, and for Weberian orders of
class, status and power – as well as the inter-
relations of ‘class and its others’ (Gibson-
Graham et al., 2000) of race, ethnicity, gen-
der and sexual identity, age and other axes
of difference. Class inequalities are deeper
than ever, but these multiple dimensions are
subject to reconfiguration amidst the rising
informational content and increasingly algo-
rithmic nature of production, consumption,
governance, education and social reproduc-
tion in cognitive capitalism. The accelerating
scope and pace of these reconfigurations –
experienced and threatened shifts in market
demands, for instance, and the Silicon
Valley ‘disruption’ of various occupations
and industries – are returning the concept of
‘class’ to more of the original meanings
intended by Galton and Pearson: any system
of social ranking, categorisation or classifi-
cation used to determine hierarchical
difference.

It should now be clear that understanding
the upward class transformation of urban
space requires that we expand our imagina-
tion of gentrification (Lees, 2012; Lees et al.,
2015a, 2015b) – not to provincialise it to par-
ticular neighbourhoods, cities or regions
(Maloutas, 2011). The upward class trans-
formation of urban space is manifest in any
empirical situation where individual or
group differences result in a more powerful
group coming to dominate any urban ‘place
of encounter’.15 In market systems for hous-
ing, labour and education, hierarchies of
power involve economic competition for
urban locations, but of course all societies
are also constituted by other inequalities
of identity, difference and power. These

2534 Urban Studies 52(14)



inequalities come together in varied ways in
different cities, but the recognition of post-
colonial pluralities, contingent causes and
consequences, and de-centred ‘sites of episte-
mological production’ (Baptista, 2013: 590)
should not blind us to the generic power
(Clark, 2015: 454) of two universals: (1)
competition, and (2) classification systems
that distinguish individuals and/or groups.
While in capitalism money provides the ulti-
mate classification system, cognitive-cultural
capitalism is defined by increasingly diverse
pathways from cultural identity and creativ-
ity to the valorisation of success through
competition. This competition is increasingly
mediated through socially networked infor-
mation technologies and other changes in
the infrastructures of observation, measure-
ment and classification that govern the
development and certification of human cap-
ital, the management of the creative powers
of cognitive labour, and the advertising-
driven monetisation of human social rela-
tions, attention and learning.

The gentrification literature has, for
entirely understandable reasons, focused
heavily on real-estate and land-market
dynamics: the rhythms of real-estate capital
investment and disinvestment are crucial
moments and measures of class transforma-
tion. But today’s cognitive capital inter-
weaves real estate capital flows with media
and educational discourses and communica-
tions circuits in ever more powerful and crea-
tive ways. We need to take LinkedIn CEO
Jeffrey Weiner very seriously, then, when he
outlines the goals of the company’s recent
acquisition of the online learning enterprise
lynda.com, as part of an effort to expand the
‘addressable market by $30 billion’: ‘We
want to digitally map the global economy,
identifying the connections between people,
companies, jobs, skills, higher educational
organizations and professional knowledge
and allow all forms of capital, intellectual

capital, financial capital, and human capital
to flow to where [they] can best be leveraged’
(quoted in MarketWatch, 2015). We also
need to take seriously the rapidly changing
relations among informational innovation,
the accumulation and circulation of capital,
and the legal rules of state and corporate sur-
veillance. We know that there is a bizarre,
retroviral sort of transnational regeneration
underway when Mark Zuckerberg pays
US$100 million for a 750-acre parcel on the
North Shore of Kauai that includes a former
sugarcane plantation (Stone, 2015), while
requiring the carpenters and labourers reno-
vating his house in San Francisco to sign
detailed non-disclosure agreements (Richtel,
2015), while ostentatiously staging a copy of
Xi Jinping: The Governance of China on his
desk at Facebook headquarters so that Lu
Wei can pause and smile as a photographer
captures the moment: ‘One photo taken of
the Facebook visit and posted on a site asso-
ciated with China’s State Council
Information Office shows Mr. Lu smiling as
he looks down at the book’ (Mozur, 2014).
Lu Wei is described in the West as ‘China’s
Internet Czar’, but that is a little out of date
in an age when Zuckerberg can say with a
straight face that he bought Lu Wei’s book
so that he and his coworkers ‘understood
socialism with Chinese characteristics’
(Mozur, 2014) by carefully studying the wis-
dom of the Minister of Cyberspace
Administration who has worked so hard and
so skillfully to measure, monitor and manage
(i.e. suppress) online discussion of social
movements resisting demolition and reloca-
tion in China’s domicide (Shao, 2013; also
see Mozur and Perlez, 201416). We have
come a long way from John Sexton’s appeal
to JFK’s anticommunist ‘new frontier’ as he
works to build the Global Network
University.

In the age of the ‘stretch-limo optimism’
of the Reagan years, Neil Smith mused:

Wyly 2535



No one has yet seriously proposed that we
view James Rouse – the developer responsible
for such maverick downtown tourist arcades
as Baltimore’s Inner Harbor, South Street
Seaport in New York, or Boston’s Faneuil
Hall – as the John Wayne of gentrification,
but insofar as such projects serve to anchor
the gentrification of many downtowns, the
proposal would be quite in keeping with the
frontier discourse. (Smith, 1996: xv)

Today, no one has yet seriously proposed
that we view Lu Wei or Mark Zuckerberg as
the agents of Spike Lee’s Christopher
Columbus syndrome. But the proposal
would be quite in keeping with a Silicon
Valley frontier discourse in which Obama
tells a cybersecurity conference at Stanford,
‘This cyberworld is sort of the Wild West’,
not long after the PRC’s image of Lu Wei
and Zuckerberg scored a photo-op nearly as
prominent as the famous February, 2011
White House image of a private dinner in
San Francisco where Obama raises a toast
to Zuckerberg, Steve Jobs, and the CEOs of
Google, Yahoo!, Twitter, Oracle, Netflix
and Cisco Systems. LinkedIn wants to allow
all forms of capital – intellectual, financial
and human – to flow where they can best be
leveraged, but has agreed to censor some of
its content in order to gain access to the
unprecedented growth frontier of the pla-
net’s largest stock of urbanising human capi-
tal (Mozur, 2014).

Turner’s noösphere

Now we can begin to see the full implica-
tions of the Global Network University as a
cyborg MOOCification17 of Chicago School
urbanism, the cosmopolitan patriots as post-
Galton-esque, non-hereditary genius descen-
dants of Frederick Jackson Turner, and
John Sexton’s ‘tremendous opportunity in
the process of global evolution’ in the
Teilhardian noösphere mutating into a ruth-
lessly competitive capitalist colonisation of

Dewey’s cognitive Darwinism. ‘We began to
create a new industrial revolution inside peo-
ple’s heads’, Richard Florida proclaimed in
a community summit – ‘Innovation: The
Shock of the Possible’ – in the Queen
Elizabeth Theatre in Vancouver in the
Autumn of 2014, in the same month Pope
Francis spoke at the Pontifical Academy of
Sciences and ‘appeared to endorse two
major scientific concepts that have given
religious believers big trouble: the Big Bang
and evolution’ (Mooney, 2015). Richard
Florida’s creative-class capitalists embody
the new industrial revolutions going on
inside their heads, in the survival-of-the-fit-
test competition of urban entrepreneurialism
in the age of planetary urbanisation. The
cognitive revolutions that inspire Florida are
also the focus of neoclassical, neoliberal eco-
nomics18 at the nexus with neurobiology,
behavioural psychology, Big Data and the
thriving ‘neuromarketing’ literature that
gives us articles with titles such as
‘Evolutionary Neuromarketing: Darwinizing
the Neuroimaging Paradigm for Consumer
Behavior’ (Garcia and Saad, 2008).19 To
really understand the frontiers of accumula-
tion by information, however, Florida’s
boosterism – he praises Vancouver as ‘the
most beautiful city on the planet’ – was just
a warmup act for the main event: Ray
Kurzweil. Kurzweil is ‘one of the world’s
leading inventors, thinkers, and futurists’,
and Forbes has called him ‘the ultimate
thinking machine’ (SFU Public Square,
2014). Kurzweil is a cartographer of the new
evolutionary frontier of exponential
advances in information processing, biotech-
nology, communications and neuroscience
in the ‘law of accelerating returns’–‘the
inherent acceleration of the rate of evolu-
tion, with technological evolution as a conti-
nuation of biological evolution’ (Kurzweil,
2005: 7). Technological advances are speed-
ing up our evolution so fast that we are on
the verge of extending life expectancy by

2536 Urban Studies 52(14)



more than a year each year – so if you can
just hold on a bit longer, he reassures us, we
will get to a technologically enabled immor-
tality – the Singularity. ‘Ultimately, every-
thing is going to be information’, Kurzweil
emphasises, including our consciousness.
Today’s genetic engineering successes on a
few of the 23,000 software programs inside
us will be ‘a million times more powerful
twenty years from now’. The latest genera-
tion of Parkinson’s treatments have implants
in the brain with software updates delivered
from outside the patient’s body, and soon
we will ‘basically put our brain on the
cloud’. ‘We will be a hybrid of biological
and nonbiological thinking’, Kurweil
explains. When he is asked a question about
education, he answers with an insistent opti-
mism: ‘Nanobots in the neocortex will com-
municate with the cloud’, and ‘nanobots
communicating with neurons’ will serve as
‘brain extenders’ that will become available
to more and more people – not just the rich.
‘We are already integrated with our brain
extenders’, he observes, and at one point
Kurzweil holds out his cell phone and tells
the audience, ‘It’s a gateway from my brain
to the cloud’. Kurzweil is only the most affa-
ble and mainstream ambassador of a diverse
‘transhumanism’ movement that ranges all
the way from corporate singulatarians (such
as Peter Thiel, co-founder and former CEO
of PayPal, Google’s Larry Page and Sergey
Brin, and Sun Microsystems founder Bill
Joy) to ‘anarcho-capitalist’ libertarians and
DIY biohackers in communes with names
such as Cyberpunk Apocalypse (Flatley,
2015). The movement also includes techno-
eugenics advocates such as Zoltan Istvan,
whose manifesto ‘It’s Time to Consider
Restricting Human Breeding’ combines
admiration for China’s one-child policy with
praise for ‘a new transhuman-inspired birth
control device’ developed at MIT and now
funded by Bill Gates. It’s an implanted
birth-control microchip that lasts 16 years

and ‘can deliver hormones into the body via
an on-off switch on your mobile phone’,
Istvan (2014) explains; ‘It’s not a huge jump
to imagine governments seeing opportunity
in using this. Many children born into pov-
erty end up costing governments billions. .
a high percentage of those same kids will
end up on the streets, in gangs, or in prison
after they become adults’ (Istvan, 2014).20

This is what the new urban frontier looks
like when today’s informational capitalists
undertake a leveraged buyout of the revolu-
tionary urban theories of the 1960s and
1970s. The social movements of Castells’
(1983) City and the Grassroots are now the
Networks of Outrage and Hope of ‘connec-
tions between networks of neural networks
from human brains stimulated by signals
from a communications environment
through communication networks’ (Castells,
2012: 219). Kurzweil studies brain extenders
and the evolutionary hybrid of neocortex
and the cloud as director of Engineering at
Google, and as co-founder, with Larry Page,
of an institution called Singularity
University.

Universities, and their ecosystemic posi-
tion in global city-regions, play very special
roles in the evolving interface between loca-
lised urban encounters (in a Lefebvrian
sense) and the ‘massive communications sys-
tems’ (Webber, 1964) that now shape con-
temporary class competition on a planetary
scale. University towns always seem to pres-
ent themselves as places of equity, diversity,
inclusion and the limitless frontiers of ideal-
ism of students working to build new
futures; but they are also sites of the exclu-
sivity, instrumental rationality and hamster-
wheel competitions for credentials and the
narrowing paths towards economic security
that reflect and reinforce the inequalities of
wider societies. Globally, the ‘tertiary enroll-
ment ratio’ – the ‘proportion of the respec-
tive age cohort enrolled in university’ –
jumped from 14% to 32% in the two

Wyly 2537



decades up to 2012 (Duncan, 2015: 4). ‘The
World is Going to University’, the cover
story of The Economist proclaims, and this
is where we can see furthest into the future
frontiers of how gentrification is evolving,
and how evolution is being gentrified.
University towns and cities – and indeed all
places from which people are aspiring and
striving to gain access to the cultural and
economic capital symbolised by the idea of
‘University’ – constitute a crucial transna-
tional institutional interface between loca-
lised spaces of encounter and competitive
processes that are speeding up and becoming
more geographically expansive and dynamic.
Sexton’s Global Network University is only
one of the more explicit brand names for a
wider intensification of educational competi-
tion driven by a universalising moral discur-
sive momentum: who can oppose the latest
strategic plan for a school to be ‘world
class’? Who doesn’t want their children to do
their best, to get the best opportunities? Not
long ago, the publisher James Atlas (2011)
read a brochure announcing the year’s win-
ners of a prestigious study-abroad fellow-
ship, and was astonished at the level of
achievement: ‘Let’s call this species Super
Person’, he suggests, and asks, ‘Do we have
some anomalous cohort here? Achievement
freaks on a scale we haven’t seen before?
Perhaps there’s an evolutionary cause .’.
William Deresiewicz, a former English pro-
fessor at Yale, describes the students of the
Ivy League as an ‘alien species’ of ‘bionic
hamsters’ (quoted in Heller, 2014: 68). At
the University of British Columbia, one of
the recently admitted students is a 15-year-
old who completed high school in two years;
along the way, he invented an environmen-
tally friendly soap made from waste oil and
created a handwriting recognition software
application, before winning a nationwide
competition for a lucrative scholarship
(Chan, 2014). At the same time, one of my
students too ‘ordinary’ to win a lucrative

scholarship struggled while searching for an
apartment in Vancouver’s turbocharged
rental housing market; she arrived to one
viewing only to find 15 other students, all
studying application forms pre-printed with
a question that transformed the advertised
monthly rent into a bidding war: ‘How
much more are you willing to pay per
month?’. Vancouver has more supercars per
capita than any other metropolis in North
America, and has the planet’s second-
highest home-price-to-income ratio (behind
only Hong Kong) (Ian Young, speaking on
Brown, 2015). Another student tells me of
her narrowly missed traffic accident after
being cut off by a young UBC student at the
wheel of a Rolls Royce – the kind of
encounter that has become sufficiently fre-
quent to inspire an anonymous blogger to
create a Tumblr page with crowdsourced
images of Ferraris, Maseratis and other tro-
phies at the ‘University of Beautiful Cars’.21

Elsewhere in the city, one of the restaurants
in the rapidly gentrifying epicentre of pov-
erty and disinvestment sells tokens that can
be given to the local homeless and panhand-
lers to redeem for a free sandwich; the ‘idea-
listic’ entrepreneur’s ‘quest to make an
impact on the neighbourhood’ is chronicled
in a ‘docu-reality’ series featured on the
Oprah Winfrey Network (see Aiello, 2014).
Another restaurant scrambling to survive in
a ruthlessly competitive landscape of ‘ethical
entrepreneurialism’ that carefully negotiates
the moral rent gap that mediates the rela-
tions between ‘culinary authenticity’ and
hard-edged poverty (Hyde, 2014; cf. Aiello,
2014; Burnett, 2014) features a Cdn$0.50
menu item with a promise to donate half the
proceeds to local charities: ‘misfortune
cookies’. On the other side of a downtown
transformed by multiple generations of
urban renewal, the latest celebrity-architect
trophy-tower – Vancouver’s first entry into
the world-city club of the ‘super-prime’
building classification – includes today’s

2538 Urban Studies 52(14)



trending accessory for the socially conscious
condo buyer:

Vancouver House residents will also be con-
nected to the global community through
World Housing, which helps build houses for
Third World families living in garbage dumps.

For every suite purchased at Vancouver
House, a new home will be donated to a fam-
ily in Cambodia. Strengthening the connec-
tion, each Vancouver House resident will be
able to meet the family it assisted, either on
paper or online. (Stone, 2014: G6)

The ‘one-for-one real estate gifting model’ of
World Housing connects Vancouver’s ever-
escalating property market – as well as its
growing community of professionals com-
mitted to the ‘social sustainability’ and ‘ethi-
cal architecture’ movements – to a garbage
dump outside Phnom Penh through the phi-
lanthropist Scott Neeson, a former president
at Twentieth Century Fox International
involved in more than 200 films over a
decade (Bellett, 2014). Bjarke Ingels, the
young starchitect of Vancouver House who
has advised that his profession should be
properly understood as ‘Worldcraft’ – turn-
ing ‘surreal dreams into inhabitable space’ –
has gone on to submit one of the designs
under consideration for Google’s new head-
quarters campus in Mountain View,
California. The plan would replace an exist-
ing patchwork of 7.5 million square feet of
leased office space with a new landscape for
which Google will be its own developer, cre-
ating the equivalent of four Empire State
Buildings’ worth of office space in large,
transparent canopies that will be movable,
‘like furniture’ (Dougherty, 2015).

Google’s furniture future provides a
unique perspective on the ‘furniture of the
mind’ that so fascinated Dewey in the
Darwinian revolution a century ago. The
Googleplex is just across the highway from
the old NASA Ames Research Park, where
we now find Singularity University. Part of

the Singularity – that wonderful convergence
of people, creativity and code that reminds
John Sexton of Teilhard’s noösphere –
involves what Marc Andreesen (2011) has
described as ‘software eating the world’, as
code replaces conscious, embodied human
labour. ‘Technology changes, and it changes
more quickly than human beings change’,
Nick Carr (2014: 40) warns. ‘Where comput-
ers spring forward at the pace of Moore’s
law, our own innate abilities creep ahead
with the tortoise-like tread of Darwin’s law’.
Carr’s (2014) review of the history makes it
clear that those words could have been spo-
ken by the pioneers of cybernetics (such as
the child prodigy who entered Tufts
University at age 11 and earned a PhD from
Harvard at age 18, Norbert Wiener); but
read those words again, and consider how
each of these figures might respond: Herbert
Spencer, John D Rockefeller, Patrick
Geddes, John Dewey, Robert Park,
Frederick Jackson Turner, Charles Galton,
Ed Glaeser, John Sexton, Richard Florida
and Ray Kurzweil. Kurzweil’s ‘brain exten-
ders’ and ‘nanobots’ connecting individual
brains to the cloud promise to resolve the
speed differential between Moore’s law and
Darwin’s law – like the ‘genetic surgeon’
described by Sir Charles Galton Darwin
back in 1955 – creating a new cognitive
Darwinism that adapts to the stepped-up
pace of competition in today’s survival-of-
the-fittest worlds of social Darwinism. This
is the future. For only US$12,000 (US$1,000
down) you can take the week-long Executive
Program at Singularity University to learn
how to adapt, compete and survive in an
urbanising world where Silicon Valley’s
update of Geddes’ ‘neotechnic order’ has
intensified the urbanisation of social-
Darwinist competitive evolution: the new
planetary urban frontier.

Or you could try to get into Stanford, or
Berkeley, or Harvard or MIT, or perhaps
NYU’s Global Network University.

Wyly 2539



Compete with the best. As we consider the
accelerating race between technology and
education – as humans compete on ever
more planetary scales with other humans,
with robots and with code – we get a glimpse
of the future of measurement, classification
and the competitive transformation of the
urban. The view from Silicon Valley is clear.
There is no need to put on the Google Glass
headset to see Turner’s noösphere. You see
it in the rage over the tech industry’s turbo-
charged gentrification of San Francisco, and
the protests over the private Google Buses
taking tech workers out from the San
Francisco neighbourhoods they have
invaded to the suburban Valley. You see it
in the recombinant innovations of capital,
property, creativity and information
amongst entrepreneurs, developers and
homebuyers racing to survive in their partic-
ular ecosystemic urban niches in cities
around the world. You see it in every year’s
class of hopeful students around the world
struggling to get into the very best universi-
ties, even as those universities scramble fur-
iously to work their way up in all the
various rankings. You see it in the multi-
tudes who apply to institutions such as the
Global Network University, Singularity U,
or a growing number of elite university divi-
sions and franchises that all, taken together,
bear a striking resemblance to Galton’s
(1910) final fantasy – the cosmopolitan
patriots of his utopian novel The Eugenic
College of Kantsaywhere. Look at the cos-
mopolitan pioneers of the noösphere on the
Singularity frontier. You can see the evolu-
tion of gentrification, and the gentrification
of evolution.

Acknowledgements

I am grateful to the Editors of Urban Studies, and
to SAGE, for the opportunity to present a ver-
sion of this paper to the Annual Conference of
the Association of American Geographers in
Chicago, April 2015. Thanks to Tony O’Sullivan,

Ronan Paddison, Andrew Cumbers, Jon
Bannister, Robert Lake, Emily Rosenman and
Pablo Mendez for valuable comments and recom-
mendations on previous versions. I also apologise
to the prominent ecological modelling specialist
David P Turner at Oregon State University,
whose contemporary analysis of the noösphere
(Turner, 2005) should not be confused with the
target of my title – the evolutionary
environmental-determinist historian Frederick
Jackson Turner; thanks to Tony O’Sullivan for
the reference.

Funding

This research received no specific grant from any
funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-
for-profit sectors.

Notes

1. Sexton’s vision for cosmopolitan patriots
and citizens of global society also includes
superstar faculty recruitment. NYU Abu
Dhabi has led to ‘an extraordinary elevation
of brand’, he explains to a correspondent
from The Economist; ‘For 15 years I had
been trying to get Anthony Appiah to come
to NYU. One Trip to Abu Dhabi, and he
came’ (Duncan, 2015: 11).

2. Appiah (1997: 617) begins his essay thus:
‘My father was a Ghanaian patriot. He once
published a column in the Pioneer, our local
newspaper in Kumasi, under the headline,

‘‘Is Ghana Worth Dying For?’’ and I know
that his heart’s answer was yes .’. But
when his father died, Appiah and his sisters
found an unfinished note of ‘last words and
wisdom’ for his children, including this
advice: ‘Remember that you are citizens of
the world’ (Appiah, 1997: 618).

3. Indeed, part of Dewey’s brilliance was in
applying evolutionary logics to individual
theories and theorists themselves. Dewey
saw Spencer’s enormous popularity in
laissez-faire America as the historically evo-
lutionary culmination of English liberalism:
‘he is not one creator with many others of
the theory of evolution, but its own concrete
incarnation’ (Dewey, 1904: 53).

2540 Urban Studies 52(14)



4. ‘The concept of knowledge as a tool for sur-
vival – cognitive Darwinism – is as old as
biological Darwinism’, Rescher (1977: 126)
emphasises. Rescher’s (1977) ‘evolutionary
epistemology’ places cognitive Darwinism at
the centre of pragmatism much as Harvey
(2011) places ‘mental conceptions of the
world’ at the core of his contemporary
understanding of a ‘coevolutionary’ histori-
cal materialism. Rescher (1977: 307) makes
the case that ‘European Marxists’ and
‘American pragmatists’ share the fundamen-

tal ‘tendency of thought – the idea of the
controlling role of the demands of practical
life as the ultimate arbiter of cognitive ade-
quacy’. Rescher’s (2005: x) subsequent
inquiry has focused on a critical realist prag-
matism devoted to ‘how we can manage our
cognitive affairs sensibly in situations of
imperfect information’.

5. Friedman’s appeal to ‘natural selection’ had
an ‘enduring influence’ in the field’s hege-
mony, but the early post-war ‘brief flurry’ of
‘biological thinking in economics had less
impact than its successors. Its much dimin-
ished effect is explicable, given its immediacy
after the Nazi holocaust, and the prior reac-
tion against biological thinking in the social
sciences in the 1920s and 1930s’ (Hodgson,
2009: xxi). In a foreshadowing of the dog-
whistle discourses that would later become
so effective in the ruthless politics of neoli-
beralism, Friedman (1953: 22) includes scare
quotes in his brief engagement with evolu-
tionary theory: ‘The process of ‘‘natural
selection’’ thus helps to validate the hypoth-
esis – or, rather, given natural selection,
acceptance of the hypothesis can be based
largely on the judgment that it summarizes
appropriately the conditions for survival’.
Friedman (1953) manages to cite Veblen as
well as Armen Alchian’s (1950) famous and
explicitly Darwinian analysis of uncertainty
without ever once mentioning ‘Darwin’ or
‘evolution’ in the text or the index.

6. When Darwin’s ‘first note-book was
opened’, he ‘worked on true Baconian prin-
ciples & without any theory collected facts
on a wholesale scale’, but ‘how selection
could be applied to organisms living in a

state of nature remained for some time a
mystery to me. In October 1838, that is fif-
teen months after I had begun my systematic
enquiry, I happened to read for amusement
‘‘Malthus on Population’’, & being well pre-
pared to appreciate the struggle for existence
which everywhere goes on from long-
continued observation of the habits of ani-
mals & plants, it at once struck me that
under these circumstances variations would
tend to be preserved & unfavorable ones to
be destroyed. The result of this would be the

formation of new species. Here then I had at
last got a theory by which to work;’
(Darwin, 1876: 410, 411).

7. The ‘mathematical theory of evolution’ of
Galton, Weldon and Pearson intersected (or
nearly so) in Princeton in other ways.
Charles Galton Darwin directed the UK’s
National Physical Laboratory in the years
Alan Turing developed the analysis culmi-
nating in a 1948 research report on
Intelligent Machinery, and Darwin arrived
for the Man’s Role conference during the
months when the Williams vacuum tube
amplifiers of the new computer at the
nearby Institute for Advanced Study were
working the night shift on a numerical evo-
lution algorithm. The Norwegian mathemat-
ical physicist Nils Barricelli was writing and
testing sequences of computer code ‘able to
reproduce, undergo mutations, and associ-
ate symbiotically within the 40,960-bit mem-
ory of the new machine’ (Dyson, 2012: 227).
Ironically enough, Barricelli developed his
self-replicating digital ‘symbioorganisms’ to
demonstrate that mutual cooperation was
more important than the atomised natural
selection and random variation components
of neo-Darwinian evolution that had been
hijacked by neo-Malthusian social
Darwinists.

8. In a later chapter, Hoyt (1933: 355–356)
describes the inner-city ‘blight’ that shaped
US urban renewal policy and that Neil

Smith (1979) would later theorise as the rent
gap: ‘a low level of rents and a high percent-
age of loss in collecting that small amount, a
heavy rate of physical deterioration of prop-
erty caused by waste, neglect, and acts of

Wyly 2541



vandalism, reduce land values in these sec-
tions occupied by ‘‘hobos,’’ seasonal work-
ers, and criminals of Native American stock
and by the lowest classes of Mexicans,
negroes, and South Italians to a very low
point. There is now a valley in the land-
value curve between the Loop and the other
residential areas .’.

9. The crystallising cognitive calculus of late-
1960s planning theory was best expressed by
a young urban planning scholar who would
later go on to serve in the US Department of

Housing and Urban Development in the sur-
real Clinton years of a partially revivified
urban policy seen through the parallax view
of neoliberal economic de-regulation and a
seemingly relentless electoral conservative
suburbanisation of American politics.
Michael Stegman (1969) responded to the
runaway popularity of transportation models
of urban structure inspired by the Alonso–
Muth approach by emphasising the impor-
tance of housing and neighbourhood aspects
of consumer choice: ‘It is conceivable that
while location rents are high near the core
because of the concentration of nonresiden-
tial activities and the relatively large number
of particular consumers who find it either
necessary or desirable to live near their
places of work, these rents would be even
steeper if the available housing were of higher

quality and the environment more amenable.
[emphasis added] What might accompany
such a positive change in housing conditions
and environment is a complete reversal of
income groups – the wealthy would occupy
the accessible and desirable inner rings, for-
cing the poor to live on the fringes.’

10. Ian Young, a seasoned and transnational
journalist who writes a column titled ‘The
Hongcouver’ for the South China Morning
Post, cites estimates that between 2005 to
2012, about 45,000 millionaire migrants
arrived in Vancouver under two immigrant
investor programmes – compared with fewer

than 30,000 for the entire USA. ‘So,
Vancouver has recently received more wealth-
determined migration than any other city in
the world, by a long stretch. This, in a city

with some of the lowest incomes in Canada’
(Young, 2015). See also Ley (2010: 56–64).

11. Yan’s real-estate analyses have been covered
extensively in the local press for several
years, and were then featured in a short
piece in the New Yorker (Surowiecki, 2014)
– a degree of attention from above on the
urban hierarchy that was in turn noted by a
local writer frustrated with life in the ghost-
town blocks of investor-owned properties in
one of Vancouver’s epicentres of transna-
tional super-gentrification (Saddy, 2015).

Yan’s work was subsequently featured in the
Harvard International Review (Dorfmann,
2015). An alternative formulation of the
‘hedge city’ idea was offered by Lawrence D
Fink, head of the world’s largest hedge fund
(BlackRock), at a conference in Singapore:
‘Historically, gold was a great instrument
for storing wealth’, but now, ‘the two great-
est stores of wealth internationally today
[are] contemporary art . and, two, the
other store of wealth today is apartments in
Manhattan, apartments in Vancouver, in
London’ (cited in Yaffe, 2015: D2). Still
another formulation was offered by Albert
Lo, a realtor and head of the Canadian
Race Relations Foundation, describing
immigrants who ‘park large amounts of
money’ in Canadian real estate and then ‘go
back to work in China’ or elsewhere (quoted
in Todd, 2015: A5).

12. ‘. There’s a business now where people –
you pay – people don’t even have kids yet
and they’re taking this course on how to get
your kid into private school. I’m not lying!’
(quoted in Coscarelli, 2014).

13. A widely circulated image from news reports
in May, 2012 showed students in a high
school in Hubei Province hooked up to
intravenous drips of amino acids to help
them study for the upcoming gaokao. The
brutally competitive high-stakes exam ‘has
become the target of criticism and national
reform because it is considered the root

cause of all education ills in China: from the
lack of innovation and creative citizens to
deteriorating health among children, from
widespread cheating and fraud to student

2542 Urban Studies 52(14)



suicides, and from massive inequality in edu-
cation opportunities to unbearable academic
pressure on students’ (Zhao, 2009: 49).

14. The wholesale frontier includes the less visi-
ble but more lucrative circulatory infrastruc-
ture of corporate capitalism. Amazon
Supply is a B2B (business-to-business)
e-commerce site targeting wholesale distri-
bution – initially, among the 35,000 separate
enterprises in the USA. Amazon booked
US$74 billion in revenues in 2013, but
aspires to the US$8 trillion distribution mar-

ket in the USA and then beyond. As Prentis
Wilson, head of Amazon Supply, explains:
‘Our goal is to supply everything needed to
rebuild civilization’ (quoted in O’Connor,
2014: 89).

15. Contemporary literatures on gentrification
are enriched by theoretical and empirical
innovations tracking the evolution of
difference, class and the multiply scaled cir-
culation of meanings and discourses in
cognitive-cultural capitalist urbanism. For
examples focusing on the local politics and
competitive marketing on the ‘culinary fron-
tier’ of restaurants in Vancouver, see Aiello
(2014) and Burnett (2014); on the ‘ideologi-
cal lineage’ from eugenics to contemporary
psychopathology at the nexus of gentrifica-
tion, homelessness and severe mental illness,
see Durgan (2013); on the cultural politics of
neighbourhood representation and the cor-
rosive effects of gentrification on the mean-
ings of local cultural practices, see Alfasi
and Ganan (2015) on Jerusalem, Parekh
(2015) on New Orleans, Chang (2015) on
‘aesthetic regulation’ in Singapore, and
Scott (2011b) on ‘aestheticized land-use
intensification’ in a variety of cities of the
cognitive-capitalist ‘third wave’.

16. Mazur and Perlez (2014) provide an account
of Lu Wei’s ‘well-publicized dinners at fancy
Beijing restaurants’ with China’s ‘Big V’s,
referring to the ‘verified account’ social
media icons with ‘millions of online fol-

lowers’ who ‘had already shown how they
could turn sensitive subjects – like forced
relocations and environmental problems –
into national debates that upset the
Communist Party’. Robert Moses worked

the media when he was taking a ‘meataxe’
to the Bronx, but his tools and informa-
tional skills appear quaint and primitive
when compared with Snowden’s NSA and
Lu Wei’s Ministry of Cyberspace
Administration.

17. MOOCs are Massive Open Online Courses,
an intensely hyped development at the inter-
section of information technology, educa-
tion and globalisation. The potential scale
was most clearly demonstrated in 2011,
when the former head of Google X and

online learning firm Udacity, Sebastian
Thrun, offered an online course on artificial
intelligence at Stanford. Some 160,000 from
more than 190 countries signed up for the
MOOC, and approximately 14% obtained a
Certificate of Completion.

18. Recent economics literature highlights dra-
matic mutations of the consumer sover-
eignty, demand-side theories that Neil Smith
fought against for decades. The ‘exponential
rise’ (Hodgson, 2009: xxii) of Darwinism in
economics has paralleled and reinforced the
neoliberalisation of space, of urban theory
and policy (Peck and Tickell, 2002). Edward
Wilson’s ‘sociobiology’ has coalesced with
Gary Becker’s (1976) suggestion of a
‘genetic determination of . human beha-
vior modelled along neoclassical lines’,
Arthur Robson’s (2002) attempt to ‘show
how Darwinian evolution would lead to
utility-maximizing behavior consistent with
the standard axioms of rationality’, and
Kenneth Binmore’s (2005) use of game the-
ory to build an ‘evolutionary theory of mor-
ality and natural justice, while retaining
utility-maximizing agents’ (all quotes from
Hodgson, 2009: xxiii, xxv, xxv). The ‘explo-
sion of research in economics inspired by
evolutionary thinking’ (Dopfer, 2005: 3) has
been so intoxicating for the possibility of
hacking the source code of homo sapiens
oeconomicus (HSO) as ‘the basic unit of an
evolutionary’ paradigm that economists

have become uncharacteristically reflexive
on the secrets of their success: ‘What are the
factors that may conceivably account for the
present dynamism of evolutionary econom-
ics? We get a first hint when we consider

Wyly 2543



that, in their field of study, orthodox econo-
mists encounter decreasing marginal returns
with respect to new theoretical findings per
additional unit of research effort or research
time. Linking this with the conjecture that
creative minds are attracted by new oppor-
tunities for developing their theory enables
us to obtain a hypothesis that accounts for
the phenomenon that outstanding neoclassi-
cal economists are increasingly turning to
research areas that can be linked to evolu-
tionary ideas’ (Dopfer, 2005: 3).

19. The ‘neurological’ turn is only the most
extreme case of a wider quest to develop a
science to understand the innovative genius
of homo urbanus and homo creativitus
(Florida, 2014: 8). Florida’s recent creative-
class work fuses psychology, geography and
urban economics in a new human-ecology
‘psychogeography’ to understand the role of
‘geographic clusters of openness to experi-
ence’ on the pace of ‘regional economic and
cultural development’ (Florida and
Mellander, 2014: 261).

20. Not long ago, New York City’s Human
Resources Administration plastered subway
cars with ads designed to drive down teen
pregnancy rates – one shows a Black baby
girl asking, ‘Honestly Mom . chances are
he won’t stay with you. What happens to
me?’ Overall city birthrates, however, have
fallen to their lowest levels since the Great
Depression – with notable exceptions in
TriBeca, the Upper East Side and Brooklyn
Heights, where ‘stroller gridlock in gentrify-
ing areas’ and ‘car services that cater to 5-
year-olds’ proliferate along with frustration
‘about overcrowding in affluent school dis-
tricts and rising numbers of children attend-
ing private school, making admission even
more impossible’ (Bellafonte, 2015).

21. Responding to the site’s tagline for UBC,
‘Where some students drive Maseratis to
school while others commute for hours’,
Vivien Chang (2014) provides a vivid

account of the overcrowded bus route
(along with a Jacob Riis update) for readers
of the national news magazine Maclean’s:
‘The buses to UBC are frequently operating
over capacity, especially during peak hours,

leaving students on the street corners as they
pass by. Getting off the bus wet, tardy and
irritable, I have often been struck by the
irony of coming face to face with a luxury
car and its gawking driver, and thinking,
‘‘So this is how the other half lives’’.’

References

Aiello D (2014) Vancouver’s downtown Eastside:

An ethnography of restaurateurs and neighbor-

hood change. MA Thesis. Burnaby, BC:

Department of Geography, Simon Fraser

University.
Alchian AA (1950) Uncertainty, evolution, and

economic theory. Journal of Political Economy

58(2): 211–222.
Alfasi N and Ganan E (2015) Jerusalem of (for-

eign) gold: Entrepreneurship and pattern-

driven policy in a historic city. Urban Geogra-

phy 36(2): 157–180.
Allen J and Cochrane A (2007) Beyond the terri-

torial fix: Regional assemblages, politics, and

power. Regional Studies 42: 1161–1175.
Alonso W (1964) Location and Land Use. Cam-

bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Andreesen M (2011) Why software is eating the

world. Wall Street Journal, 20 August.
Appiah KA (1997) Cosmopolitan patriots. Criti-

cal Inquiry 23(3): 617–639.
Atkinson R and Bridge G (eds) (2005) Gentrifica-

tion in a Global Context: The New Urban Colo-

nialism? New York: Routledge.
Atlantic Monthly (1864) Review, illustrations of

progress: A series of discussions with Herbert

Spencer, with a notice of Spencer’s ‘New Sys-

tem of Philosophy,’ New York: D. Appleton

& Co. Atlantic Monthly 13(80): 775–777.
Atlas J (2011) Super people. New York Times, 1

October.
Aviv R (2013) The imperial presidency. The New

Yorker, 9 September.
Ball P (2006) Econophysics: Culture crash. Nature

441: 686–688.
Ball P (2014) Gentrification is a natural evolution.

The Guardian, 19 November.
Baptista I (2013) The travels of critiques of neoli-

beralism: Urban experiences from the ‘Border-

lands’. Urban Geography 34(5): 590–611.

2544 Urban Studies 52(14)



Barnes TJ (1998) A history of regression: Actors,

networks, machines, and numbers. Environ-

ment & Planning A 30: 203–223.

Beauregard RA (1986) The chaos and complexity

of gentrification. In: Smith N and Williams P

(eds) Gentrification of the City. Boston, MA:

Allen & Unwin, pp. 35–55.
Becker GS (1976) Altruism, egoism, and genetic

fitness: Economics and sociobiology. Journal

of Economic Literature 14(2): 817–826.
Bellafonte G (2015) Baby boom among New

York’s affluent. New York Times, 30 April,

MB1.
Bellett G (2014) Ex-film mogul finds fulfillment in

dump. Vancouver Sun, 5 November, A9.
Berry BJL (1978) Geographical theories of social

change. In: Berry BJL (ed.) Perspectives in

Geography 3: The Nature of Change in Geogra-

phical Ideas. DeKalb, IL: Northern Illinois

Press, pp. 17–35.
Berry BJL (1980) Creating future geographies.

Annals of the Association of American Geogra-

phers 70(4): 449–458.
Big Think (2014) We are big idea hunters. Available

at: http://bigthink.com (accessed 16 August 2014).
Binmore K (2005) Natural Justice. Oxford:

Oxford University Press.
Blaut J (1993) The Colonizer’s Model of the

World. New York: Guilford Press.
Block RH (1980) Frederick Jackson Turner and

American geography. Annals of the Association

of American Geographers 70(1): 31–42.
Bowman I (1932) Obituary: Frederick Jackson

Turner. Geographical Review 22: 499.
Brown J (2015) CanadaLand: Episode 86, Hon-

gcouver. Available at: http://canadalandshow.-

com/podcast/hongcouver.

Buchanan M (2007) The Social Atom: Why the

Rich Get Richer, Cheaters Get Caught, and

Your Neighbor Usually Looks Like You. New

York: Bloomsbury.
Burnett K (2014) Commodifying poverty: Gentri-

fication and consumption in Vancouver’s

downtown Eastside. Urban Geography 35(2):

157–176.
Butler T (2007) For gentrification? Environment

and Planning A 39(1): 162–181.
Buttimer A (1971) Society and Milieu in the French

Geographic Tradition. Chicago, IL: Rand

McNally/Association of American Geographers.

Carapezza K and Noe-Payne M (2014) NYU’s

John Sexton: Higher education costs. On Cam-

pus: WGBH News Higher Education Blog, 17

October. Boston, MA: WGBH Public Broad-

casting System.
Carr N (2014) The Glass Cage: Automation and

Us. New York: Norton.
Castells M (1983) The City and the Grassroots.

Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Castells M (2012) Networks of Outrage and Hope:

Social Movements in the Internet Age. Cam-

bridge: Polity Press.
Cavell R (2002)McLuhan in Space: A Cultural Geo-

graphy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Cayne BS (ed.) (1990) The New Lexicon Webster’s

Encyclopedic Dictionary. New York: Lexicon

Publications.
Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions (2006)

Forced Evictions: Violations of Human Rights.

Tenth Global Survey of Forced Evictions. Gen-

eva: Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions.
Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions (2007)

Mega-Events, Olympic Games, and Housing

Rights. Geneva: UN Habitat/Centre on Hous-

ing Rights and Evictions.
Chan C (2014) Scholarship boosts 15-year-old at

UBC. The Province, 19 August, A4.
Chang TC (2015) New uses need old buildings:

Gentrification aesthetics and the arts in Singa-

pore.Urban Studies. Published Online FirstMarch

18 2014. DOI: 10.1177/0042098014527482.
Chang V (2014) What’s behind the University of

Beautiful Cars? Maclean’s, 6 March.
Clark E (1987) The Rent Gap and Urban Change:

Case Studies in Malmö, 1860–1985. Lund:

Lund University Press.
Clark E (2005) The order and simplicity of gentri-

fication: A political challenge. In: Atkinson R

and Bridge G (eds) Gentrification in a Global

Context: The New Urban Colonialism. Lon-

don: Routledge, pp. 256–264.
Clark E (2015) Afterword: The adventure of gen-

eric gentrification. In: Lees L, Bang Shin H

and López-Morales E (eds) Global Gentrifica-

tions: Uneven Development and Displacement.

Bristol: Policy Press, pp. 453–456.
Clark TL and Clark E (2012) Participation in

evolution and sustainability. Transactions of

the Institute of British Geographers NS37:

563–577.

Wyly 2545



Comte A (1842) Social Physics. Book VI, Course

in Positive Philosophy. Reprinted in Lenzer G

(ed.) (1998) Auguste Comte and Positivism:

The Essential Writings. New Brunswick, NJ:

Transaction Publishers, pp. 195–297.
Coscarelli J (2014) Spike Lee’s amazing rant

against gentrification: ‘We Been Here!’. New

York Magazine, 25 February.
Darwin C (1876) Recollections of the Develop-

ment of My Mind and Character. In: Secord

JA (ed.) Charles Darwin: Evolutionary Writ-

ings. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.

355–425.
Darwin Sir CG (1956) The time scale in human

affairs. In: Thomas WL (ed.) Man’s Role in

Changing the Face of the Earth. Chicago, IL:

University of Chicago Press, pp. 963–969.
Davidson M and Lees L (2010) New-build gentri-

fication: Its histories, trajectories, and critical

geographies. Population, Space, and Place 16:

395–411.
Dewey J (1904) The philosophical work of Her-

bert Spencer. The Philosophical Review, rep-

rinted in Ratner J (ed.) (1929) Characters and

Events: Popular Essays in Social and Political

Philosophy by John Dewey. New York: Henry

Holt & Company, pp. 45–62.
Dewey J (1909) The influence of Darwin on

philosophy. Popular Science Monthly 75: 90–98.
Dewey J (1918) Internal social reorganization

after the war. Journal of Race Development,

April, reprinted in Dewey J (1939) Intelligence

in the Modern World. New York: Random

House/Modern Library, pp. 405–433.
Dewey J (1920) Reconstruction in Philosophy.

New York: Henry Holt.
Dewey J (1939) Socializing intelligence. Excerpts

from Liberalism and Social Action (1929) and

Individualism Old and New (1930), reprinted in

Dewey J (1939) Intelligence in the Modern

World. New York: Random House/Modern

Library, pp. 455–466.
Dopfer K (2005) Evolutionary economics: A the-

oretical framework. In: Dopfer K (ed.) The

Evolutionary Foundations of Economics. Cam-

bridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 3–55.
Dorfmann J (2015) New wealth seeks a ‘home’:

The rise of the hedge city. Harvard Interna-

tional Review 36(3). Available at: http://hir.

harvard.edu/archives/10888.

Dougherty C (2015) Google unveils plan for new

corporate campus. New York Times, 27

February.

Duncan E (2015) Excellence v. equity: Special

report on universities. The Economist, 28

March, 19 pp.
Durgan E (2013) Resistance and complexity: Solu-

tions to urban crises of homelessness and psy-

chopathology through psychiatry, architecture,

and philosophy. Ph.D. Thesis, Vancouver:

Interdisciplinary Studies, The University of

British Columbia.
Dyson G (2012) Turing’s Cathedral: The Origins

of the Digital Universe. New York: Vintage.
Ely RT (1884) The Past and the Present of Politi-

cal Economy. Johns Hopkins University Stud-

ies in Historical and Political Science, Vol. II.

Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University.
Entrikin JN (1980) Robert Park’s human ecology

and human geography. Annals of the Associa-

tion of American Geographers 70(1): 43–58.
Fernandes L (2006) India’s New Middle Class:

Democratic Politics in an Era of Economic

Reform. Minneapolis, MN: University of Min-

nesota Press.
Flatley JL (2015) In the basement with transhu-

manism’s DIY cyberpunks. The Daily Dot, 26

April.
Florida R (2003) Cities and the creative class. City

& Community 2(1): 3–19.
Florida R (2006) The flight of the creative class:

The new global competition for talent. Liberal

Education 92(3): 22–29.
Florida R (2014) Foreword. In: Knox PL (ed.)

Atlas of Cities. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-

versity Press, pp. 8–9.
Florida R and Mellander C (2014) Geographical

Psychology: Exploring the Interaction of Envi-

ronment and Behavior. Washington, DC: Amer-

ican Psychological Association, pp. 261–274.
Friedman M (1953) Essays in Positive Economics.

Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Galton F (1869) Hereditary Genius: An Inquiry

Into Its Laws and Consequences. London:

Richard Clay and Sons.
Galton Sir F (1910) The Eugenic College of Kant-

saywhere. London: University College

London.
Garcia JR and Saad G (2008) Evolutionary neu-

romarketing: Darwinizing the neuroimaging

2546 Urban Studies 52(14)

http://hir.harvard.edu/archives/10888
http://hir.harvard.edu/archives/10888


paradigm for consumer research. Journal of

Consumer Behavior 7: 397–414.
Garcı́a-Ajofrin L (2014) Es el puto sı́ndrome de

Christóbal Colón. Nosotros hicimos Harlem,

ahora nosechan. El Confidential, 20 June.
Geddes P (1915) Cities in Evolution. London: Wil-

liams & Norgate.
Ghent WJ (1902) Our Benevolent Feudalism. New

York: MacMillan.
Gibson-Graham JK, Resnick SA and Wolff RD

(eds) (2000). Class and its Others. Minneapolis,

MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Glaeser E (2011) Triumph of the City: How Our

Greatest Invention Makes Us Richer, Smarter,

Greener, Healthier, and Happier. New York:

Penguin.
Glass R (1964) Introduction. In: Centre for Urban

Studies (ed.) London: Aspects of Change. Lon-

don: MacGibbon & Kee, pp. xii–xlii.
Hamnett C (1991) The blind men and the ele-

phant: The explanation of gentrification.

Transactions of the Institute of British Geogra-

phers NS 16(2): 173–189.
Harris A (2008) From London to Mumbai and

back again: Gentrification and public policy in

comparative perspective. Urban Studies 45(12):

2407–2428.
Harvey D (1973) Social Justice and the City. Lon-

don: Edward Arnold.
Harvey D (1978) On countering the Marxian

myth – Chicago-style. Comparative Urban

Research, reprinted in Harvey D (ed.) (2001)

Spaces of Capital: Towards a Critical Geogra-

phy. New York: Routledge, pp. 68–89.
Harvey D (1982) The Limits to Capital. Chicago,

IL: University of Chicago Press.
Harvey D (1989) The Urban Experience. Balti-

more, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Harvey D (2014) Seventeen Contradictions and the

End of Capitalism. Oxford: Oxford University

Press.
Heller N (2014) Poison ivy: Are elite colleges bad

for the soul? The New Yorker, 1 September,

pp. 68–72.
Hodgson G (2003a) Darwinism and institutional

economics. Journal of Economic Issues 37(1):

85–97.
Hodgson G (2003b) Preface. In: Laurent J (ed.)

Evolutionary Economics and Human Nature.

Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. ix–xiii.

Hodgson GM (2009) Introduction. In: Hodgson

GM (ed.) Darwinism and Economics. Chelten-

ham: Edward Elgar, pp. xi–xxxvi.

Hofstadter R (1944) Social Darwinism in Ameri-

can Thought, 1860–1915. Philadelphia, PA:

University of Pennsylvania Press.
Hoyt H (1933) One Hundred Years of Land Values

in Chicago: The Relationship of the Growth of

Chicago to the Rise in its Land Values, 1830–

1933. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago

Press.
Hyde Z (2014) Omnivorous gentrification: Res-

taurant reviews and neighborhood change in

the downtown Eastside of Vancouver. City &

Community 13(4): 341–359.
Iossifova D (2009) Negotiating livelihoods in a

city of difference: Narratives of gentrification

in Shanghai. Critical Planning 16(2): 99–116.
Istvan Z (2014) It’s time to consider restricting

human breeding. Wired UK, 14 August.
Keynes JM (1926) The End of Laissez-Faire. Lon-

don: L.&V. Woolf.
Knopp L (1997) Gentrification and gay neighbor-

hood formation in New Orleans: A case study.

In: Gluckman A and Reed B (eds) Homo Eco-

nomics: Capitalism, Community, and Lesbian

and Gay Life. New York: Routledge, pp. 45–

63.
Krueckeberg DA (1995) The difficult character of

property: To whom do things belong? Journal

of the American Planning Association 61(3):

301–309.
Kurzweil R (2005) The Singularity is Near: When

Humans Transcend Biology. London: Penguin.
Lambert C and Boddy M (2002) Transforming

the City: Post-Recession Gentrification and Re-

urbanisation. ESRC Centre for Neighbour-

hood Research, Glasgow.
Lanier J (2010) You Are Not a Gadget: A Mani-

festo. New York: Knopf.
Lanier J (2013)Who Owns the Future? New York:

Norton.
Lee-Young J (2015) Buyer of $51.8M home was a

duck farmer. Vancouver Sun, 18 March, A6.
Lees L (2012) The geography of gentrification:

Thinking through comparative urbanism.

Progress in Human Geography 36(2): 155–171.
Lees L, Shin HB and López-Morales E (2015a)

Conclusion: Global gentrification. In: Lees L,

Shin HB and López-Morales E (eds) Global

Wyly 2547



Gentrifications: Uneven Development and Dis-

placement. Bristol: Policy Press, pp. 441–452.
Lees L, Shin HB and López-Morales E (2015b)

Introduction: ‘Gentrification’ – A global

urban process? In: Lees L, Shin HB and

López-Morales E (eds) Global Gentrifications:

Uneven Development and Displacement. Bris-

tol: Policy Press, pp. 1–18.
Lees L, Slater T andWyly E (eds) (2010) The Gen-

trification Reader. London: Routledge.
Lefebvre H (1970) The Urban Revolution. 2003

Translation, Robert Bononno. Minneapolis,

MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Ley D (1987) Reply: The rent gap revisited.

Annals of the Association of American Geogra-

phers 77(3): 465–468.
Ley D (1996) The New Middle Class and the

Remaking of the Central City. Oxford: Oxford

University Press.
Ley D (2010) Millionaire Migrants: Trans-Pacific

Life Lines. Chichester: Wiley.
Ley D and Teo SY (2013) Gentrification in Hong

Kong? Epistemology vs. ontology. Interna-

tional Journal of Urban and Regional Research

38(4): 1286–1303.
Lowry IS (1960) Filtering and housing standards:

A conceptual analysis. Land Economics 36(4):

362–370.
McCann E, Roy A and Ward K (2013) Urban

pulse: Assembling/worlding cities. Urban Geo-

graphy 34(5): 581–589.
MacKenzie D (1976) Eugenics in Britain. Social

Studies of Science 6(3/4): 499–532.
Maloutas T (2011) Contextual diversity in gentrifi-

cation research. Critical Sociology 38(1): 33–48.
Maloutas T (2011) Contextual diversity in gentri-

fication research. Critical Sociology 38(1):

33–48.
Malthus TR (1798) An Essay on the Principle of

Population. London: J. Johnson, in St. Paul’s

Church-yard.
MarketWatch (2015) LinkedIn wants to map the

global economy. MarketWatch, 9 April.
Martindale D (1958) Prefatory remarks: The the-

ory of the city. In: Martindale D and Neuwirth

G (eds, trans.) Max Weber, The City. Glencoe,

IL: The Free Press, pp. 9–60.
Mazur P and Perlez J (2014) Gregarious and

direct: China’s web doorkeeper. New York

Times, 1 December.

Merrifield A (2013) The urban question under

planetary urbanization. International Journal

of Urban and Regional Research 37(3):

909–922.
Metzger JT (2000) Planned abandonment: The

neighborhood life-cycle theory and national

urban policy.Housing Policy Debate 11(1): 7–40.
Mirowski P (2005) How positivism made a pact

with the postwar social sciences in the United

States. In: Steinmetz G (ed.) The Politics of

Method in the Human Sciences: Positivism and

its Epistemological Others. Durham, NC:

Duke University Press, pp. 142–172.

Mooney C (2015) Pope dares to side with science.

Washington Post, 3 January, B5.
Moulier-Boutang Y (2012) Cognitive Capitalism.

Cambridge: Polity.
Mozur P (2014) Warm West Coast reception for

China’s web czar (chillier in Washington). New

York Times, 8 December.
Muth R (1969) Cities and Housing. Chicago, IL:

University of Chicago Press.
New York Times (2015) $100.4 million sale at

One67. New York Times, 23 January.
Nguyen T (2014) NY Times to reporters: Please

stop comparing everything to Brooklyn. Med-

iaite.com, 18 November. Available at: http://

www.mediaite.com/online/ny-times-to-reporte

rs-please-stop-comparing-everything-to-brook

lyn/.
Norton BJ (1978) Karl Pearson and statistics: The

social origins of scientific innovation. Social

Studies of Science 8(1): 3–35.
O’Connor C (2014) Amazon’s wholesale slaugh-

ter. Forbes, 26 May, pp. 88–94.
Ong A (1999) Flexible Citizenship: The Cultural

Logics of Transnationality. Durham, NC:

Duke University Press.
Ong A (2011) Worlding cities, or the art of being

global. In: Roy A and Ong A (eds) Worlding

Cities: Asian Experiments and the Art of Being

Global. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 1–26.
Parekh T (2015) They want to live in the Tremé,

but they want it for their ways of living. Urban

Geography 36(2): 201–220.
Park RE (1921) The social organism and the col-

lective mind. American Journal of Sociology

27(1): 1–21.
Park RE (1925) The city: Suggestions for the

investigation of human behavior in the urban

2548 Urban Studies 52(14)

http://www.mediaite.com/online/ny-times-to-reporters-please-stop-comparing-everything-to-brooklyn/
http://www.mediaite.com/online/ny-times-to-reporters-please-stop-comparing-everything-to-brooklyn/
http://www.mediaite.com/online/ny-times-to-reporters-please-stop-comparing-everything-to-brooklyn/
http://www.mediaite.com/online/ny-times-to-reporters-please-stop-comparing-everything-to-brooklyn/


environment. In: Park RE, Burgess EW and

McKenzie RD (eds) The City. Chicago, IL:

University of Chicago Press, pp. 1–46.

Peck J and Tickell A (2002) Neoliberalizing

space. Antipode 34(3): 380–404.
Rees PW (2015) London needs homes, not towers of

‘safe-deposit boxes’. The Guardian, 25 January.
Ren J (2015) Gentrification in China? In: Lees L,

Bang Shin H and López-Morales E (eds) Glo-

bal Gentrifications: Uneven Development and

Displacement. Bristol: Policy Press, pp. 329–

347.
Rescher N (1977) Methodological Pragmatism: A

Systems-Theoretic Approach to the Theory of

Knowledge. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Rescher N (2005) Realism and Pragmatic Episte-

mology. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pitts-

burgh Press.
Richtel M (2015) For tech titans, sharing has its

limits. New York Times, 14 March.
Robinson J (2006) Ordinary Cities: Between Mod-

ernity and Development. New York: Oxford.
Robson A (2002) Evolution and human nature.

Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(2): 89–106.
Rose D (1984) Rethinking gentrification: Beyond

the uneven development of Marxist urban the-

ory. Environment and Planning D, Society and

Space 1: 47–74.
Roy A (2011) Postcolonial urbanism: Speed, hys-

teria, mass dreams. In: Roy A and Ong A

(eds) Worlding Cities: Asian Experiments and

the Art of Being Global. Chichester: Wiley-

Blackwell, pp. 307–335.
Saddy G (2015) If this is our new urban dream, is

the West Side sleeping through it? Vancouver

Magazine April, pp. 46–53.
Schill M and Nathan R (1983) Revitalizing Amer-

ica’s Cities: Neighborhood Reinvestment and

Displacement. Albany, NY: State University

of New York Press.

Scott AJ (2007) Capitalism and urbanization in a

new key? The cognitive-cultural dimension.

Social Forces 85(4): 1465–1482.
Scott AJ (2011a) A world in emergence: Notes

toward a resynthesis of urban-economic geo-

graphy for the 21st century. Urban Geography

32(6): 845–870.
Scott AJ (2011b) Emerging cities of the third

wave. City 15(3/4): 289–321.

Scott AJ (2014) Beyond the creative city: Cogni-

tive-cultural capitalism and the new urbanism.

Regional Studies 48(4): 565–578.

Secord JA (2008) Introduction. In: Secord JA (ed.)

Charles Darwin: Evolutionary Writings. Oxford:

Oxford University Press, pp. vii–xxxvii.
Sexton J (2008) NYU’s global future. Speech dis-

tributed on Big Think. Available at: http://

bigthink.com (recorded 29 May).
Sexton J (2010) Global Network University Reflec-

tion. 21 December. New York: Office of the

President, New York University.
SFU Public Square (2014) Innovation: The Shock

of the Possible. Vancouver/Burnaby: Simon

Fraser University.
Shao Q (2013) Shanghai Gone: Domicide and Defi-

ance in a Chinese Megacity. Lanham, MD:

Rowman & Littlefield.
Shin HB (2012). Looking Back and Ahead: Les-

sons from the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games.

London: London School of Economics.
Slater T (2009) The eviction of critical perspec-

tives from gentrification research. International

Journal of Urban and Regional Research 30(4):

737–757.
Slater T (2014) There is nothing natural about gen-

trification. New Left Project, 24 November.
Slater T (2015) Planetary rent gaps. Antipode,

forthcoming. Available at: http://www.geo

sciences.ed.ac.uk/homes/tslater/planetaryrentg

aps.pdf.
Smith N (1977) The Return from the Suburbs and

the Structuring of Urban Space: State Involve-

ment in Society Hill, Philadelphia. St. Andrews:

Department of Geography, University of St.

Andrews.
Smith N (1979) Toward a theory of gentrification:

A back to the city movement by capital, not

people. Journal of the American Planning Asso-

ciation 45(4): 538–548.
Smith N (1987) Commentary: Gentrification and

the rent gap. Annals of the Association of

American Geographers 77(3): 462–465.

Smith N (1996) The New Urban Frontier: Gentri-

fication and the Revanchist City. New York:

Routledge.
Smith N (2002) New globalism, new urbanism:

Gentrification as global urban strategy. Anti-

pode 34(3): 427–450.

Wyly 2549

http://www.geosciences.ed.ac.uk/homes/tslater/planetaryrentgaps.pdf
http://www.geosciences.ed.ac.uk/homes/tslater/planetaryrentgaps.pdf
http://www.geosciences.ed.ac.uk/homes/tslater/planetaryrentgaps.pdf


Smith N (2003) American Empire: Roosevelt’s
Geographer and the Prelude to Globalization.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Smith N (2009) The revolutionary imperative.
Antipode 41(S1): 50–65.

Smith N (2011) The evolution of gentrification.
In: Berg J, Kaminer T, Schoonderbeek M and
et al. (eds) Houses in Transformation: Interven-
tions in European Gentrification. Rotterdam:
NAi Publishers, pp. 15–26.

Stegman MA (1969) Accessibility and models of
residential location. Journal of the American

Institute of Planners 35(1): 22–29.
Stone F (2014) Vancouver house tower a ‘living

sculpture’. Vancouver Sun, 13 September, G4,
G6.

Stone M (2015) Silicon Valley CEOs just want a
little privacy. $100 million and 750 acres of it.
Business Insider, via Slate, 18 May.

Surowiecki J (2014) Real estate goes global. New
Yorker, 26 May.

Taylor M (2003) Harlem: Between Heaven and
Hell. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minne-
sota Press.

Teilhard de Chardin P (1947) The formation of
the noosphere. In: Denny N (trans.) The
Future of Man. New York: Doubleday, pp.
149–178.

Teilhard de Chardin P (1956) The antiquity and
world expansion of human culture. In: Tho-
mas WL (ed.)Man’s Role in Changing the Face
of the Earth. Chicago, IL: University of Chi-
cago Press, pp. 103–112.

Teilhard de Chardin P (1964) The Future of Man.

Denny N (trans.). New York: Doubleday.
The Editors (2015) Editorial: New urban geogra-

phies. Urban Geography 36(3): 327–339.
Todd D (2015) Ritzy neighborhood where many

are ‘poor’. Vancouver Sun, 15 June, A1, A5.
Turner DP (2005) Thinking at the global scale.

Global Ecology and Biogeography 14: 505–508.
Turner FJ (1893) The significance of the frontier

in American history. Annual Report of the

American Historical Association, pp. 199–227.
Webber MM (1964) The urban place and the non-

place urban realm. In: Webber MM, Dyckman

JW, Foley DL and et al. (eds) Explorations

into Urban Structure. Philadelphia, PA: Uni-

versity of Pennsylvania Press, pp. 79–153.
Wheaton W (1977) Income and urban residence:

An analysis of consumer demand for location.

American Economic Review 67: 620–631.
White M and White L (1962) The Intellectual Ver-

sus the City: From Thomas Jefferson to Frank

Lloyd Wright. Cambridge: Harvard University

Press/MIT Press.
Yaffe B (2015) Real estate pandemonium. Van-

couver Sun, 26 May, D2.
Young I (2015) Something is grotesquely wrong

with Vancouver’s housing market, and the

time for denialism is over. South China Morn-

ing Post, 21 May.
Zhao Y (2009) Comments on the Common Core

Standards Initiative. AASA Journal of Scho-

larship and Practice 6(3): 46–54.

2550 Urban Studies 52(14)



